
NORTHRIDGE TAUGHT A LESSON

School has been out at Cal State Northridge since
the week before Christmas , but since you can learn something every
day , Mississippi State 's women 's basketball team gave a lesson .

Northridge has talked about taking its game to the next level .
The 21st-ranked Bulldogs _ the first nationally ranked team to play
here in Northridge 's Division I era _ gave a glimpse of that level
in a 98-64 nonconference victory before a crowd of 165 Friday
night .

It ended CSUN 's 16-game home win streak .

Whether the Matadors learned from the Bulldogs -LRB- 10-0 -RRB- remains to
be seen . The Big Sky Conference season begins Thursday at Northern
Arizona , but the Matadors do n't believe they 'll face anyone of this
caliber .

`` Our conference is n't that strong , '' Edneisha Curry admitted ,
`` so we have to play hard and play with the type of desire and
heart night in and night out , so we can play with Mississippi State
and all the other ranked teams . ''

For now , they have completed the most difficult portion of the
schedule with two losses to nationally ranked teams in Illinois and
Mississippi State and a win over an NCAA Tournament team in
Dartmouth . It leaves them 6-4 , the same record they had at this
time last year .

Then again , they were n't talking about elevating their game at
this time last year . Since the Matadors have reached the NCAA
Tournament and are hungry for more , Mississippi State provided
clues to what they need to do .

It 's the basics : shoot a high percentage , rebound well and
commit fewer turnovers and fouls . Shooting 36.7 percent , taking
just 28 boards and committing 17 turnovers might be enough to win
the Big Sky , but it wo n't get you past Mississippi State , which
shot 50.7 percent and took 51 rebounds . Although the Bulldogs
turned over the ball the same number of times , they also committed
six fewer fouls .

It also helps to have a player like freshman LaToya Thomas , who
can deliver points in bunches when needed . Thomas scored 33 ,
including 18 in the first half , but was most valuable in the second
half when she scored eight points in a 10-0 run that ended any hope
of a Northridge comeback . CSUN had cut a 50-25 halftime deficit to
59-45 with 12:21 to play and had some momentum .

`` Our goal in the second half was to cut it to 10 by the
10-minute mark , '' CSUN coach Frozena Jerro said .

Actually , Northridge has a Thomas-like player in Curry , who
scored 21 points . But she made 9 of 23 field-goal attempts , far
below Thomas ' 11 of 18 .

The other time Northridge was close was when it scored eight
straight points and trailed 13-12 with 12:46 to play in the first
half . Mississippi State responded with a 25-7 run in 9:10 to put
the game out of reach .

`` Right now , they 're getting a lot of experience , '' Bulldogs
coach Sharon Faning said . `` They need to work on footwork , defense ,
rebounding _ same as us . ''

Three other Mississippi State players scored in double figures :
Jennifer Fambrough -LRB- 22 -RRB- , Cynthia Hall -LRB- 11 -RRB- and Meadow Overstreet
-LRB- 11 -RRB- . Northridge got 14 from Lynda Amari and 13 from LaShaunda
Fowler .

A CORRECTION : WELCOME TO 51,254

For those who believe that in the good old days _
before calculators , before computers _ people were better at mental
arithmetic , The New York Times offers a sobering New Year 's
message : Not necessarily .

On Feb. 6 , 1898 , it seems , someone preparing the next day 's
front page tried to add 1 to the issue number in the upper left
corner -LRB- 14,499 -RRB- and came up with 15,000 . Apparently no one noticed ,
because the 500-issue error persisted until Friday -LRB- No. 51,753 -RRB- .
Saturday The Times turns back the clock to correct the sequence :
this issue is No. 51,254 .

Thus an article on March 14 , 1995 , celebrating the arrival of
No. 50,000 was 500 days premature . It should have appeared on July
26 , 1996 .

The error came to light recently when Aaron Donovan , a news
assistant , became curious about the numbering , which he updates
nightly when working at the news desk . He wondered about the
potential for self-perpetuating error . Using a spreadsheet program ,
he calculated the number of days since The Times ' founding , on
Sept. 18 , 1851 .

Through the newspaper 's archives , he learned that in its first
500 weeks , The Times published no Sunday issue . Then , for 2,296
weeks from April 1861 to April 1905 , the Sunday issue was treated
as an extension of the Saturday paper , bearing its number . In the
early days , the paper skipped publication on a few holidays . No
issues were published for 88 days during a strike in 1978 . -LRB- During
five earlier labor disputes , unpublished issues were assigned
numbers , sometimes because catch-up editions were later produced
for the archives . -RRB-

Finally , by scanning books of historic front pages and reels of
microfilm , Donovan zeroed in on the date of the 500-issue gap .

`` There is something that appeals to me about the way the issue
number marks the passage of time across decades and centuries , ''
said a memo from Donovan , who is 24 . `` It has been steadily
climbing for longer than anyone who has ever glanced at it has been
alive . The 19th-century newsboy hawking papers in a snowy Union
Square is in some minute way bound by the issue number to the
Seattle advertising executive reading the paper with her feet
propped up on the desk . ''

As for the other number on the front page _ the volume , in Roman
numerals _ it remains CXLIX . It will change to CL on Sept. 18 , when
The Times enters its 150th year .

MASSIVE CROWD WATCHES CLINTON IGNITE FIREWORKS SPECTACULAR TO

EDS : New top and updates throughout .

By SCOTT MONTGOMERY

c. 2000 Cox News Service

WASHINGTON _ Clear skies and a string of flawless midnight New
Year 's rollovers around the globe enticed a massive crowd to the
National Mall for a fireworks spectacular ignited by President
Clinton to greet the 21st century .

On a night when Clinton called on America to make its `` dreams
stronger than its memories , '' 2000 arrived in the nation 's capital
in a shower of light over the Washington Monument that left
thousands of spectators cheering .

Clinton , speaking from the steps of the Lincoln Memorial with
the Great Emancipator peering over his should , said `` Americans
must not fear change . Instead , '' he said , `` let us welcome it ,
embrace it , and create it . ''

Although daytime activities in Washington drew modest crowds ,
throngs streamed in by nightfall to find grassy seats on the
heavily-secured patch of the Mall .

They choked into long thick lines through a handful of security
checkpoints where revelers submitted to searches . At one point ,
crowds on 17th Street waiting to pass through security entrances
pushed over barriers and rushed past police who were helpless to
stop them .

Since last week , officials had been scaling back the size of the
crowd they expected from an original estimate of 500,000 . But as
midnight closed in , the streets teemed with people and there seemed
to be little left of the anxiety over terrorist attacks that
prompted the mayor of Seattle last week to cancel a major outdoor
celebration around the city 's famed Space Needle .

Washington 's three-hour show , with a pricetag of $ 12 million ,
competed on television with the customary Times Square celebration .
While New York 's gala featured the traditional ball of light
descending in the seconds before midnight , Washington 's had a white
light of fireworks cascading up the 555-foot Washington Monument ,
sparked by a fuse racing along the reflecting pool from the Lincoln
Memorial .

Diane Tresca and her husband , Sal , of Rhode Island , left the
friends they were visiting in a Maryland suburb to come down to the
Mall where the gala at the Lincoln Memorial also was shown on large
screen TVs set up on the grass . Their friends would n't leave their
house .

`` They 're too busy holding onto their bottled water , '' Diane
Tresca said .

She said she was n't concerned about terrorism . `` No , '' she said ,
`` I 'm more concerned about not being able to see the screen . ''

In remarks at events throughout the day , Clinton made no mention
of the unease that had settled on Washington in the weeks leading
up to Friday night . Fear of terrorism pegged to year-end
celebrations focused on Washington , New York and Seattle .

`` What we celebrate did not begin today , and it will not end
tomorrow , '' Clinton said to a crowd at the Mall earlier in the day .
`` There is no better opportunity to open a new chapter of progress
and possibility for all people ... no better time to be a truly
good neighbor to the people of the world who share this smaller and
smaller planet of ours . ''

Clinton thanked God `` for this wonderful weather , so we all feel
good being out here ... The sun is still rising on America . ''

As the sunlight faded on the day , the Siegel family of Richmond
played the card game Uno while sitting on the curb waiting , with a
few hundred others , to be let into a fenced off section of the Mall
nearest the Lincoln Memorial .

Actor and musician Will Smith hosted the three-hour stage show
called `` America 's Millennium Gala . '' Clinton and other
dignitaries , including former Sen. John Glenn , watched from a
heated booth at the Lincoln Memorial .

Among the performers were actors Robert Duvall and Jack
Nicholson , actress Diane Keaton , and musicians Don McLean , Bobby
McFerrin , Kenny Rogers , Luther Vandross , Kathy Mattea , Trisha
Yearwood , and the 25-member company of the Broadway production
`` Stomp . ''

The Siegels were n't worried about the dangers of either Y2K
chaos or terrorism . In fact , they joked about the festivities being
hosted by Smith , who has played the hero in a pair of futuristic
space-themed films , `` Men in Black '' and `` Independence Day . ''

`` We thought since Will Smith is the host and he 's killed aliens
and space bugs , you could n't be in a better-protected zone , '' joked
Dan Siegel , 46 , who was there with his wife , Peggy , and children
Julia , 16 , and Tommy , 14 .

But the potential for danger made it possible to get a hotel
room within walking distance of the Mall just last week . And , in
their one concession to the Y2K bug , the Siegels settled on
Washington as their New Year 's celebration destination because they
could make the trip from Richmond and back on a single tank of gas .

`` Just in case there 's a problem and we ca n't get any more , ''
said Peggy Siegel , also 46 .

For Benjamin McKenzie , 29 , the trip to the Mall was just a walk .
He lives on Capitol Hill and brought his 15-year-old brother , who 's
visiting from upstate New York , down for the fireworks . But he
could n't get his friends to join in .

`` They said ` No way ! '' ' McKenzie said . `` We know security is a
concern , but it 's not overwhelming . It feels like a normal day . ''

-LRB- Scott Montgomery can be reached by e-mail at :
scottm -LRB- at -RRB- coxnews.com -RRB- .

ENDIT

Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

end of story about glitch -RRB-

Airports around the world , ordinarily quiet on New Year 's Eve ,
were unusually so Friday as thousands of potential travelers stayed
put while the world 's air traffic system rolled over to the year
2000 .

Yet , despite such fears and recent concerns about terrorism ,
commercial aviation entered the new year without incident as
midnight arrived around the globe .

The major test for commercial aviation came at midnight in
London when the global air traffic control system , which observes
Greenwich Mean Time , crossed over into the new year without
difficulty .

Worldwide , about 1,350 commercial jets were in the air at the
time , according to the Air Transport Association , the airline
industry 's trade group . That was less than half the number of
planes that flew last New Year 's Eve .

Airlines around the world canceled thousands of flights because
of low demand .

Eurocontrol , the organization that coordinates air traffic over
Europe , estimated that about 50 jets were in the air at midnight , 5
percent of the peak traffic on a typical winter day .

United Airlines and American Airlines , the world 's two largest
carriers , said they had canceled about one-third of their flights
Friday .

As a result , airports across the United States appeared
desolate . The three New York airports _ Kennedy International ,
LaGuardia and Newark _ were expecting to handle only 270,000
passengers Friday , compared with 430,000 on the same day last year .

Many airline executives and aviation officials around the world
had hoped to reassure the public by being passengers themselves on
New Year 's Eve . Jane Garvey , chief of the Federal Aviation
Administration , booked herself on several flights that were
subsequently canceled .

Friday afternoon , flanked by the head of the FAA 's Year 2000
effort , two public affairs officers , Sen. Slade Gorton of
Washington and a score of journalists , she boarded an American
Airlines flight from Washington to Dallas .

With 100 empty seats available on the jetliner , the only
passenger not directly connected to Ms. Garvey 's efforts appeared
to be Janet S. Rhodes of Long Beach , Calif. , who said she came to
Washington on Friday so that she could greet the new millennium
aloft and tell her grandchildren about it .

Ms. Rhodes said she had told her four sons , `` Just follow Jane
Garvey 's progress on television and you 'll know where I am . ''

The world 's airlines and air traffic control centers spent an
estimated $ 2.5 billion to assure that their computers could read
the year 2000 correctly . But experts did not consider air safety to
be particularly vulnerable .

The only glitch reported Fridayoccurred when printers in Alaska ,
California and Long Island that are used to relay information to
control - lers from airplanes flying over the ocean all went on the
blink at mid - night Greenwich time . The failure lasted only about
30 minutes and had no operational effect , the FAA said , adding that
it was not even clear that the problem was caused by the date
change .

Boeing Co. , the world 's largest producer of commercial
airliners , said it surveyed thousands of airborne systems on its
planes and found only three that were date sensitive .

Nevertheless , many passengers said they were not taking any
chances by being in the air at the witching hour .

`` I think it will probably be OK , but I 'm trying to get home
before midnight , '' said Del Turner , who was waiting for a flight at
Los Angeles International Airport . `` Something will happen . They
have n't fixed everything . ''

RAY HUBBARD , 75 , PIONEER IN BROADCASTING

Ray Hubbard , a television producer and broadcasting executive
and a pioneer in the medium , died on Dec. 27 in Kenwood , Calif. . He
was 75 and had been suffering from Parkinson 's disease .

Hubbard was vice president for programming and production at
Post-Newsweek Stations in Washington , the broadcast group of The
Washington Post , from 1969 to 1976 . Before that he was the national
programming manager and executive producer of public affairs for
Group W , the Westinghouse Broadcasting Co. in New York , where he
helped to develop the Steve Allen , Mike Douglas , Merv Griffin and
Regis Philbin shows and `` P.M. East '' with Mike Wallace .

At Westinghouse , Hubbard was responsible for programs including
`` Discovery , '' a 13-part series on contemporary art produced with
the San Francisco Museum of Art ; `` Black Culture , '' 65 half-hour
programs created with Morgan State University in Baltimore ; and
`` Children 's Spectaculars , '' a series of hourlong dramatic shows
featuring Zero Mostel , Boris Karloff , Claire Bloom and others . He
also produced a variety of specials , including the Benny Goodman
show at the American pavilion at the 1958 World 's Fair in Brussels ,
Belgium .

An advocate of educational children 's fare , Hubbard worked with
local school systems and hired writers to create study guides , one
of the earliest examples of the interactive use of television in
learning . He was responsible for `` Harambee , '' the first daily
scheduled black culture-oriented program on American television ,
and `` Everywoman , '' the first prime-time women 's program .

Upon retiring from Post-Newsweek , Hubbard produced `` Special
Delivery , '' five half-hour programs for children about living with
disabilities . He then established Unicorn Projects Inc. , a
nonprofit production company .

Hubbard was the recipient of major broadcasting awards including
the Emmy , Dupont and George Foster Peabody Awards .

Born in Los Angeles , he graduated from the California College of
Arts and Crafts in Oakland in 1942 and earned a master 's degree in
theater and communications from Stanford University in 1951 .

He is survived by his wife , Marion ; three sons , Bruce and
Stephen , of Pasadena , Calif. , and Gregory of Wells , Maine ; and two
grandchildren .

ATTN EDs : rewrites top to add color , quotes ; fixes , changes

THIRD MILLENNIUM CELEBRATIONS CAST LIGHT ON TWO MEXICOS

By FRANC CONTRERAS

c. 1999 Special to the Cox News Service

OAXACA CITY , Mexico _ While most of Mexico welcomed the Third
Millennium with fireworks , concerts and long-standing traditions ,
the celebration was muted in rural areas by fear of rebel attacks
and the so-called Y2K bug 's negative impact on tourism .

All across Mexico and here , in this well-known colonial city ,
families joined together for traditional New Year 's Eve supper and
counted down to mid-night wearing red underwear , which they believe
brings them good luck in the new year .

`` I went to three different stores today looking for red
underwear , '' said Marta Ramales . `` But all the stores were out and
I could n't find it anywhere . ''

She opted for a red blouse and toasted the new millennium with
glass of strong mescal , Oaxaca 's answer to tequila .

After the toast , each of her 20 family members ate 12 grapes
each , one for every month . The tradition comes from Spain , where
the fruit is eaten also to bring good luck in the new year .

Behind the celebrations , small business owners said Y2K began
with a drop off in tourism among international travelers ,
especially from the United States . Many blamed it on fears of
possible Y2K computer troubles . For example , Mexico City airport
officials said 40 percent of flights on Dec. 31 were cancelled due
to `` mostly last-minute cancellations '' over Y2K concerns .

Still , young Mexican boys here in Oaxaca City celebrated the new
millennium as they do any New Year 's Eve , by tossing firecrackers
in the fiesta-filled streets . And the city planned massive
fireworks display that would take place over the colonial-era
cathedral in the city center .

An even more festive atmosphere prevailed in streets of the
capital Mexico City .

The historic Paseo de la Reforma , the city 's main boulevard , was
filled with tens of thousands of revelers , coming to see parades
and live concerts .

Cathedral bells rang in the main square , called the Zocalo ,
where 300,000 people turned out for shows by Mexico 's famous singer
Juan Gabriel and to hear 200 mariachis sing Las Golondrinas , a
traditional song that says good-bye to the old year .

Adding to the millennium fervor , President Ernesto Zedillo , in a
video-taped address , said , `` We are a country that does not measure
our history in months or years , but in

millenniums . ''

In the Mexican capital , there was little talk of Y2K computer
glitches following months of claims by government officials that
Mexico is among the most Y2K-compliant nations in the hemisphere .
It has installed computer programs to prevent banking errors , and
to keep the national stock market _ the Bolsa Mexicana de Valores _
from crashing on the new year 's first day of business .

A larger concern for the government is the threat of armed
guerillas of the Popular Revolutionary Army , or EPR , in the
mountain villages of the Sierra Madre del Sur in southern Mexico .

Heavily armed soldiers could be seen watching over villages near
Oaxaca City , thought to be rebel strongholds and stopping vehicles
at military checkpoints on the highways outside the city .

`` We know the government is bringing troops to indigenous
villages to stop the rebels , '' said Pedro Nava Rodriguez , director
of the Organization of Towns and Neighborhoods in Guerrero . `` But
they are violating the human rights of innocent people who have
nothing to do with guerilla struggles . ''

ENDIT

Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

MIDNIGHT TICKS ACROSS GLOBE , BRINGING A NEW AGE WITH IT

Two thousand years after Christ 's obscure birth in a dusty town
in Judea , the world 's 6 billion people _ most of them non-Christian
and many of them preoccupied with terrorism , computers , diets , bank
accounts , politics and the perils of the future _ rode their
turning blue planet across time 's invisible line Friday and , by
common consent , looked into the dawn of a new millennium .

What they saw first was a party . It was garish , glittering and
global , and millions , setting religious considerations and personal
concerns aside , joined in the festivities to celebrate the
conjunction of a new year , a new century and a new thousand-year
cycle of history . They also put aside the inconvenient fact that
the millennium , technically , is still a year off .

It hardly mattered . In New York 's Times Square and across the
United States , in Europe , Asia , Africa and Australia , in cities and
towns all over the world , bells pealed , crowds shrieked and surged ,
skyrockets soared into the night , fireworks burst into supernovas ,
`` Auld Lang Syne '' rang out , lights pulsed , loved ones and friends
embraced , and the music and Champagne flowed .

On a day when moods ran the spectrum from tensions and prayers
to euphoria and irresistible hyperbole , what most were calling
Christianity 's Third Millennium arrived in 24 stages as the earth
revolved through the time zones and midnight elapsed again and
again in an around-the-clock , around-the-world series of golden
moments that began at the International Dateline in the Pacific and
raced westward across Asia , Africa , Europe and the Americas .

In New York , a vast crowd of revelers _ the guesses ran as high
2 million _ packed Times Square and much of Midtown Manhattan for
the biggest public event ever held in the city _ a 26-hour , $ 7
million marathon of music , fireworks , confetti and deafening voices
culminating as a 1,070-pound crystal ball descended at midnight ,
while the police sweated out an enormous potential for trouble .

And there were lavish celebrations in Washington , London , Paris ,
Rome , Berlin , Jerusalem , Moscow , Cape Town , New Delhi , Shanghai ,
Beijing , Tokyo , Mexico City , Rio de Janeiro , Buenos Aires and
hundreds of other cities . There were parties , concerts , dances ,
torchlight parades and televised extravaganzas that brought the
worldwide show to billions more at home and to the crowds in Times
Square over giant video screens _ a case of celebrators watching
celebrators .

-LRB- BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB-

To a Martian earthwatcher -LRB- tuning in with delicate ear and
Cycloptic eye -RRB- , it might have appeared that the inhabitants of the
third world from the Sun had suddenly lost their senses or gone to
war again . But it was only humanity on the threshold of a new age ,
exercising its primal urge to celebrate .

-LRB- END OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB-

There had been an avalanche of happy millennial overkill in
recent days _ claims of the last-game , last-meal , first-baby kind _
and Friday it was the turn of world leaders in government ,
religion , science and other fields , who spoke of the millennium 's
meaning in more serious tones .

`` Today , we celebrate more than the changing of the calendar , ''
President Clinton , extending millennium greetings to the world ,
said in an address to diplomats and children from 100 nations . `` We
celebrate the opportunity we have to make this a true changing of
the times , a gateway to greater peace and freedom , to prosperity
and harmony . ''

In Moscow , Boris Yeltsin , who has been plagued with heart and
other problems for most of his eight years as Russia 's president ,
unexpectedly announced his resignation . `` Russia must enter the new
millennium with new politicians , new faces , new intelligent , strong
and energetic people , '' he said . `` And we who have been in power
for many years must go . ''

At the Vatican , Pope John Paul II , fulfilling his dream to lead
the Roman Catholic Church across the threshold of 2000 , gave his
blessing to a vast crowd in St. Peter 's Square , reiterated his
calls for an end to war and poverty , and thanked God for `` the
events of this year , this century and this millennium . ''

There were millions around the world who had no reason to be
festive , people like Tom Nganga , 40 , who lives in Kangemi , a vast
slum of Nairobi , Kenya . `` We as Kenyans and people of Kangemi are
very , very angry as we celebrate this millennium , '' he said .
`` People are very poor . People have nothing to eat . We have nothing
to celebrate . ''

While the millennium celebrations drew millions , there were
relatively few casualties . In the Philippines , two people were
killed by stray gunfire and a 5-year-old boy died after a
firecracker exploded in his face . At least 200 other Filipinos were
injured by fireworks . In Paris , 70 people were hurt in crowds .

After years of concern over Y2K computer problems that had cost
billions of dollars to fix , there were no immediate reports of
computer-related disasters anywhere in the world _ no plane
crashes , major power failures , nuclear plant shutdowns or collapses
of banking , business , government or health care systems .

But elevators , intercity trains and subways in many American
cities and in other countries as well were halted briefly over the
witching hour , and some airlines canceled flights for the day , just
to be safe . Many airports were all but deserted , with wary
travelers staying put . Experts said it might take days for some
computer problems to develop , in part because many businesses and
government agencies were closed for the holiday weekend .

There had also been fears that terrorists , publicity seekers or
the insane might set off explosions or mount chemical or biological
attacks as millions gathered to celebrate , while vast audiences
watched on television . No specific threats had been reported ,
although some suspects had been seized recently . Still , there were
no immediate reports of trouble , and law enforcement authorities
seemed ready for almost anything .

-LRB- MORE -RRB-

nn

UNDATED : almost anything .

The millennium , an idea with overtones ranging from Biblical to
commercial , had swelled recently into a coercive miniculture as the
countdown ticked away and a flood of books , articles , television
specials and studied commentaries by academic , political and
religious leaders reflected upon the last thousand years of human
achievements and missteps , and speculated on the next thousand .

Purists still insist that the millennium will not start until
Jan. 1 , 2001 , and they are no doubt right . The calendar , at best ,
is arbitrary . There were problems from ancient times based on
inaccuracies in measuring the year 's duration and its uneven
division into days , weeks and months . By 1582 , the spring equinox
was 10 days early , and the days were dropped when the Gregorian
Calendar replaced the old Julian version . While Pope Gregory 's
calendar uses the birth of Christ in 1 B.C. , as a starting date ,
many scholars now suggest that the year was probably closer to 4
B.C. .

In any case , as Voltaire noted , history is the lie that
historians agree upon , and the tide of popular opinion has swept
nearly everyone along . And with the climax of celebrations , and
especially when the nines rolled into zeros at midnight and
humanity went ballistic , purists ' talk of technicalities was the
last thing anyone wanted to hear .

For doomsayers who had prophecied conflagrations , earthquakes ,
volcanic eruptions and other end-of-the-world scenarios -LRB- and kept a
weather eye out for UFO rescue ships -RRB- , the new millennium was
something of a nonevent , although the anxiety prompted by all the
wild predictions of chaos was real enough .

The Book of Revelations , Chapter 20 , speaks of a resurrection of
the dead and a judgment day , of sinners cast into a lake of fire
and Christ reigning for a thousand years . But if it was not the
Second Coming of Jesus as foretold in the Bible , there was still a
year to go , or this was the wrong millennium .

And if , as some said , even the idea of a Third Christian
Millennium was a Western conceit in a world where Christians are a
minority , and one that overlooked other calendars calling this 1420
-LRB- Muslim -RRB- or 5760 -LRB- Jewish -RRB- , it was also true that the world had long
ago come by economic and social necessity to agree upon the Western
calendar for trade , travel and other common purposes .

The millennium , if nothing else , was a celebration of history ,
marking human survival after a deadly century of wars , genocide and
revolution that saw the end of colonialism , fascism and communism ,
as well as the achievements of the past thousand years _ printing
and widespread literacy ; the exploration of the last frontiers on
earth ; the first ventures into outer space , the inner mind and the
microscopic universe , and the flowering of democratic government ,
and of art , literature , science , technology and communications into
undreamed eminences .

The world on this Millennium Day was still beset with terrible
problems _ with grinding poverty that afflicted a third of its 6
billion inhabitants , with ethnic and national strife , with the
continuing curse of racial and religious bigotries , and with the
exclusion of countless millions from adequate health care ,
education , jobs and even such basic needs as shelter and clean
water , not to mention freedoms of speech and political association .

But with a few exceptions _ notably threats of terrorism and
limited wars in the Balkans , Chechnya and other regions _ it was a
world largely at peace , with the apocalyptic threat of nuclear
annihilation receding and new understandings growing between old
enemies in the Middle East , Ireland , South Africa and other
long-troubled areas .

And it was a world on the threshold of a new era _ one that
offered visions of astounding strides in science and technology and
seemed to hold out anew the ancient promises of universal peace and
prosperity , although the only certainty seemed to be that the world
a thousand years from now would be unrecognizable .

-LRB- END OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB-

As Dec. 31 , 1999 , gave way to Jan. 1 , 2000 , in each time zone at
midnight , with atomic clocks marking it to a millisecond ,
celebrants went ecstatic . It began in Fiji and the Kiribati and
Marshall Islands in the Western Pacific -LRB- it was 7 a.m. , EST Friday -RRB-
and moved westward , hour by hour , as the earth turned and 23 more
midnights fell across Australia , Asia , Europe , Africa , the Americas
and back across the Pacific , ending in Samoa at 6 a.m. , EST
Saturday .

Islanders in Kiribati welcomed the millennium with the mournful
sounds of a conch shell and with traditional chants and dancing on
the beach of a normally uninhabited coral atoll , dubbed Millennium
Island .

In Japan , which has absorbed many of the trappings of the
Western world while preserving its own cultural and religious
traditions , bells tolled in a Buddhist ritual to dispel evils as
thousands flocked to temples and shrines . In Tokyo , the first of
the world 's major cities to mark the new year , people went to
parties and crowds swarmed to bayside events , including rock
concerts and lavish fireworks .

In China , torchbearers in Imperial-era costumes lighted signal
fires on the watch towers of the Great Wall , which snakes 3,000
miles from the Gobi Desert to the North China Sea , and President
Jiang Zemin lighted an eternal flame to greet the new millennium
and pledged a `` great rejuvenation '' by reuniting with Taiwan .

Over Hong Kong Harbor there were brilliant fireworks displays ,
and parties abounded , a prelude to the Chinese new year , the Year
of the Dragon , which starts Feb. 5 .

-LRB- MORE -RRB-

nn

The festivities for most of India 's 1 billion people were muted
by comparison with those in wealthier nations , but hundreds of
thousands danced , drank and ate at open-air stalls in New Delhi and
partygoers were out in force in other major cities , celebrating the
peaceful end of an eight-day hostage crisis aboard an Indian
Airlines hours before midnight .

Iran and its Persian Gulf neighbors largely ignored the new
millennium , which fell during the Islamic holy month of Ramadan , a
time for prayer and reflection .

With religious bans on celebrations that might desecrate holy
days , the celebrations in Israel were relatively subdued . In
Palestinian-governed Bethlehem , the town revered by Christians as
the birthplace of Jesus , 2,000 doves were released at midnight on
Manger Square , and in secular Tel Aviv thousands just went to the
beach to watch the sun set over the Mediterranean .

Security was heavy in Israel as three religions and some
doomsday cultists marked the occasion , each in its own way . It was
especially tight on Jerusalem 's Mount of Olives , where Christian
fundamentalists had camped to witness the end of the world , and at
the Old City 's Temple Mount , with sites sacred to Muslims and Jews .

On the last New Year 's Eve of the Christian millennium ,
observant Jews ushered in the sabbath , as they do every Friday , and
many went to pray at the Western Wall , Judaism 's holiest site ,
while 400,000 Muslims flocked to the al-Aqsa Mosque on Temple Mount
to mark the last Friday of prayer and fasting in the holy month of
Ramadan .

In Paris , with new lighting on buildings , boulevards and bridges
over the Seine twinkling like the bonfires of a great Medieval
encampment , people packed the Champs-Elysees from the Tuileries to
the Arc de Triomphe as a digital clock at the Eiffel Tower counted
down _ overcoming an old-fashioned glitch that shut it down five
hours before midnight _ and announced the millennium in a burst of
20,000 electronic flashes .

In London , 2 million people lined the Thames for a spectacular
fireworks show , as Queen Elizabeth , Prime Minister Tony Blair and
other dignitaries gathered under the 20-acre Millennium Dome , a
flying-saucer-like colossus at Longitude Zero in Greenwich , to mark
the transition while the bells of St. Paul 's and Westminster and
churches across Britain pealed . Huge street parties were held in
hundreds of Britain 's cities and towns .

In Egypt , floodlights , lasers and fireworks illuminated the
ancient pyramids at Giza and electronic music reverberated over the
desert as 50,000 people wined and dined in luxury tents and watched
a sparkling millennium show under the watchful eyes of police
officers on camels .

Elsewhere , there were torchlight parades in the streets of
Stockholm ; fireworks and singing by massed choirs in Reykjavik ,
Iceland ; concerts and a ball at the opera house in Tallinn ,
Estonia ; and a Millennium Ball at the Catherine Palace in St.
Petersburg , Russia .

Across the Atlantic , in Rio de Janeiro , 3 million Brazilians ,
many of them dressed in festive white , jammed the three-mile
Copacabana beach to hear lively samba bands and toss white flowers
and perfume into the waves as gifts for Yemanja , the Yoruba goddess
of the sea . Police estimated that a record 5 million people
converged on Rio de Janeiro 's coastline .

Canada 's easternmost province of Newfoundland entered the New
Year an hour and a half ahead of New York .

In the United States , huge festivities were held on the
Washington Mall , and in New Orleans , Chicago , Miami , Los Angeles ,
Boston , San Francisco and other cities .

Far from the millennial crowds , countless people marked the
occasion quietly by attending concerts or dances or by going to
restaurants or private dinner parties , while millions more watched
on television safely at home with friends and families , taking in
the shows around the world in live planetary tableaux that might
have been imagined a century ago only by Jules Verne dreamers .

Some people paid small fortunes to ring in the millennium in
exotic places _ on the summit of Mt. Everest , at the base of the
Great Pyramid at Giza in Egypt , aboard a cruise ship in the South
Seas , or on an around-the-world supersonic flight chasing midnight
through the time zones .

In New York , it was a day to remember . The centerpiece was the
spectacle billed as `` Times Square 2000 : the Global Celebration at
the Crossroads of the World . '' Worried authorities had closed 50
blocks of midtown to traffic , banned alcohol in open containers and
flooded the area with 8,000 officers just in case . All vehicles
were towed away as a precaution against car bombs .

-LRB- STORY CAN END HERE . OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS -RRB-

Throughout the city , all 37,000 police officers were on duty ,
and there was plenty for them to do . The Times Square celebration
was only one of 329 public events in the city , the biggest of them
at Grand Army Plaza in Brooklyn , at Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in
Queens .

The celebration in Times Square went off as planned with
all-day , all-night pulsing music and cacophonous entertainments by
1,000 musicians , actors , dancers , puppeteers and other performers
working from a stage on Seventh Avenue between 45th and 46th
Streets .

Broadway , curving like a dancer 's leg , was packed from 42rd
Street to Central Park , along with most of the sidestreets between
the Avenue of the Americas and Eighth Avenue . The old wickedness of
Times Square was missing , but for most in the crowd it was an
adventure just to be caught , shoulder to shoulder , jostling for
happiness at the intersection of past and future .

The party ran all day and all night , from 6 a.m. Friday to 8
a.m. Saturday , and thousands showed up early to stake claims near
ground zero . By the time the sun went down , the crowds were already
gigantic . They came in shoals from the suburbs , from across the
nation and from countless places abroad , and they swept into the
vast clogged carnival , determined to experience the exotic and
illusory evening .

They were in a euphoric mood , capped and scarved and padded like
armadillos against the cold . They watched twilight print the sky
with darkness , and the blue night city come to life , glittering
like a tiara . By midevening , much of midtown was seized up in human
gridlock . Laser lights slid up the skyscrapers and washed over the
writhing mass of Lilliputian figures below .

The crowds were squeezed into police-barrier pens to create
lanes for emergency vehicles , and many had to watch events on giant
video screens . The closer to One Times Square , where the ball
descended , the more bleary the crowd looked , many having stood
their ground for a day and a half . A stench arose from a layer of
garbage underfoot .

The tradition of celebrants watching others celebrate was
continued on a global scale . Live video feeds from festivities
around the world were pumped into Times Square , and the scenes
there were beamed by 45 networks out to a worldwide audience of 1
billion people or more .

It was all perfect for television _ the images clear and
colorful , reducing everything , even the millennium , to
entertainment . There were no distracting speeches by dignitaries
striking the just-right crystal phrases ; indeed , the program _
including an international pageant that , hour by hour , reflected
the countries where midnight was then occurring _ was deliberately
languageless .

That , too , was perfect for this crowd , which seemed preoccupied
with itself : people taking pictures of each other , fussing with
food , gawking at the neon forest , looking for Peter Jennings , and
paying little attention to the pageant of Japanese yogi-bushi
umbrellas , Sri Lankan monk chants , Russian ballerinas , Kenyan war
dancers , Argentine rainforest butterfly puppets and Lakota Sioux in
face paint .

But the crowd got into the spirit of things , screaming numbers
as the final seconds of the failing millennium were counted down .
The tensions that had been building for weeks reached a climax , and
there was an inescapable sense of a great public moment at hand ,
one that most generations could never experience .

On center stage , the buckram face of Mayor Giuliani , proud as a
drum major , stood at the controls of the descending ball with Dr.
Mary Ann Hopkins , 36 , who was being honored for her work in
war-torn countries as a volunteer in Doctors Without Borders .

And when midnight struck , the roar was deafening : a din of
horns , amplified music and countless voices shrieking at the edge
of madness . In the chaos , lasers zoomed , flashbulbs sparkled , a
blizzard of confetti and streamers and balloons filled the air , and
in the distance a blinding dazzle of fireworks exploded .

They sang , `` Auld Lang Syne , '' and the joyous screams and
congratulatory embraces went on and on . The fireworks , too , went on
and on _ over the East River off South Street Seaport , in Central
Park , in Brooklyn 's Prospect Park _ the biggest pyrotechnic display
in history _ a booming , sparkling , scintillating barrage of rockets
and sunbursts that bathed the awed faces in eerie light and echoed
off the facades of a city that seemed to exist only in the
imagination .

PARADE CAMPERS UNDETERRED

Rain and chilly weather did n't keep thousands of
paradegoers from camping out Friday night for the 111th Tournament
of Roses .

Spirits were high among the street party crowd as they set up
for curbside seats for today 's parade .

`` I want to party all night , '' said Tyne Gaudielle , 15 , of
Glendale , who spent the last night of the year along Colorado
Boulevard with a group of friends .

Whether they came for the partying or the parade , campers were
in for a long night . Rain continued into the evening and
temperatures were expected to dip down into the low 40s .

`` Rain ca n't stop you from having fun , '' said Terry Teague , 29 ,
of Pomona .

The parade will begin at 8 a.m. and includes 54 floats , 25
marching bands , 26 equestrian units and three dignitary units .

By today , meteorologists said the sun would be out with high
temperatures in the mid 60s . History was on the side of a dry
parade as it has n't rained on the parade in 45 years and only nine
times in 111 years .

Paradegoers took refuge in any way they could . Some set up
tents . Others crammed in doorways and under awnings . Many pulled
their tarps over their sleeping bags .

`` This is uncomfortable but it 's not unbearable , '' said Ron
Pangrac , 40 , of San Jose .

Cynthia Belmonte took refuge from the rain in a shop doorway
with her family . The clan has spent New Year 's Eve on Colorado
Boulevard for the past seven years . Belmonte , 23 , of Montebello
enjoys the parade and the rowdiness the night before .

`` You may sleep an hour or two but that 's it , '' she said .
`` There are too many distractions . ''

Most paradegoers said they do n't mind missing the sleep . That 's
what New Year 's Day is for , some said . They prefer to people watch ,
make friends , play board games and chat with family members .

Many who said they usually stayed home New Year 's Eve decided to
spend the night on the street in an effort to make the last night
of the millennium a memorable one .

Marc Angelucci of Westwood had n't camped out for the Rose Parade
since he was a kid .

`` This was a must because of the millennium . It 's 2000 , '' said
Angelucci , 31 . `` I had to . ''

The Rev. Rodney A. Hilpert has traveled to Pasadena from
Northern California with a youth group from his church for the past
15 years . Hilpert brings dozens of young people to help decorate
floats and spend the night along the parade route .

`` Where else would you like to gather with 3 million of your
closest friends ? '' said Hilpert , 53 , of Placerville , Calif. `` I
would n't want to be anywhere else on New Year 's Eve . ''

For the first time , Carol Hernandez brought her family from
Temecula , Calif. , to camp out and watch the parade . Because of the
cold and rain , the family camped in shifts Friday night .

`` It 's the millennium , '' said Hernandez , 39 . `` We did n't want to
say when people asked us , where did you celebrate the millennium ? ,
that we were at home . We wanted to do something special . ''

WASHINGTON CROWD FLOCKS TO THE MALL

Although it had seen many huge crowds over the
years , for inaugurations , Fourth of July fireworks , protests and
parades , never in memory had the Mall in the nation 's capital drawn
multitudes for New Year 's . But on this mild winter night with a
lovely sunset , hundreds of thousands of people here thronged to
the Mall for a long-planned celebration on the last New Year 's Eve
of the 1900s .

`` It 's a very friendly crowd , '' Sgt. Frank R. Onolfi of the
U.S.Park Police said as afternoon turned to evening . But by shortly
after 10 p.m. , there were so many people trying to get close to the
Lin - coln Memorial , the focal point of the observ - ances where
President Clinton was about to speak , that sections of temporary
fencing were pushed down along Constitution Ave - nue . Multitudes
stormed through the gaps instead of being funneled through several
security points , where the police had been checking for alcohol .

Police officers saw that the throngs could not be repulsed
without the risk of serious injury or disorder , so they let the
people come through . Another line of fences stopped them close to
the reflecting pool , and the police said order was soon restored .
No serious injuries were reported .

Early in the evening , it was clear that the crowd was befitting
of a cosmopolitan city and a changing America . The celebration drew
people of different languages and ac - cents , from other countries ,
from all over the United States and from Washington it - self .
People who live in the District tend to be blase about motorcades
and potentates and ceremonies , but many Washingtonians thought
Friday night 's event was something they could not miss .

`` We normally stay home on New Year 's , but we had to see the
millennium celebration , '' Thea Anderson said . She and her husband ,
Clarence , who have lived in the District for 27 years , were at
first a little nervous about venturing out , given the talk of
danger , however remote . But in the end , they took the Metro
downtown and were glad they did .

Patrick and Jane Wilson of Greenville , S.C. , arrived Friday
morning , early enough to get close to President Clinton at an event
before midday . Mrs. Wilson was delighted to get pictures of the
president , and the couple were pleased with the crowd-control
measures , which they found efficient without being oppressive .

`` Everything is so laid-back , '' Mrs. Wilson said . `` There 's no
pushing or shoving . ''

The events of Friday made the Wilsons feel at home again , in a
sense . They were out of the country for several years _ she travels
a lot for business _ and their return has not been altogether
pleasant . They said they had noticed heightened suspicions at
airports and other gathering places , and she has had to explain why
she has been to Kuwait .

Many people at the Mall Friday night wore party hats . One
merchandise tent offered `` millennium celebration '' certificates .
An entrepreneur hawked T-shirts labeled , `` I survived Y2K . '' The
going rate was $ 5 .

For a relative few , the evening called for tuxedos and formal
gowns _ proper attire for the White House Millennium Dinner , where
the first family greeted guests before leaving for fireworks
festivities on the Mall .

Joggers threaded their way nonchalantly through the Mall
celebrators . There was lots of room , the Mall being one of the
jewels that make this a pedestrian-friendly city .

For all the anticipation , some people were just not getting it .
Connie Liang brought her children _ one 18-months-old , the other
3-years-old . `` My children are too young to remember this , '' she
said , `` but at least they will be able to say they were here . ''

HOW MANY COULD THEORETICALLY FIT IN TIMES SQUARE ?

Half a million ? A million ? A zillion ? The world will
never know how many humans squeezed their way into the Designated
Watching Zones around Times Square to see the ball drop , but it is
not impossible to estimate how many people could have been there .

Keep in mind , this calculation includes only the areas from
Times Square north _ where people at least theoretically could see
the top of 1 Times Square _ and does not include those watching
from skyscraper windows or peering at video screens along side
streets . Or simply partying somewhere in the vicinity of
mid-Manhattan . In the enthusiastic run-up to the celebration ,
overall estimates were running as high as 2 million people .

Anyway , here 's the math :

According to practitioners of the inexact science of crowd size
estimation , an average standing person will fit in a square about
17 inches on each side , or about 2 square feet . According to the
official plan , the city was only allowing spectators into pens that
took up about half of the pavement area along each block of
Broadway and Seventh Avenue , between 42nd Street and 59th Street .

But to take the most-crowded-case scenario , assume that every
inch of pavement along Broadway and Seventh , as well as a few feet
of each side street , was filled with people .

A typical block of Seventh Avenue around Times Square is 265
feet long and 60 feet wide , for a total of about 15,900 square feet
_ enough room for 7,950 people . A typical block of Broadway is a
bit longer _ about 275 feet , enough space for 8,250 people .

Adding up all the blocks of Broadway and Seventh Avenue between
42nd Street and Central Park South , including the trapezoid where
Broadway and Seventh intersect , and figuring 20 feet or so of
cushion on each side street , the total capacity of the viewing area
is , approximately , 300,538.5 people .

` POLISH PIECES ' : THE ALVIN AILEY TROUPE EXPLORES LOVE

One of the happiest aspects of the Alvin Ailey
American Dance Theater winter season , which ends Sunday , has been
the performing .

Burnished to a glow by Judith Jamison and Masazumi Chaya ,
longtime former Ailey dancers who are now , respectively , the
troupe 's artistic director and associate artistic director , the
performers ' high technical level and individuality were seen to
their best advantage in Hans van Manen 's `` Polish Pieces '' on
Wednesday afternoon at City Center .

The piece , choreographed in 1995 and set to a driving score by
Gorecki , has 12 dancers crossing and recrossing the stage in
staggered lines and layered small groups . Three brief duets are
embedded in the flow of the dance , which ends with odd abruptness .
Kevin E. Boseman and Stephanie Powell were the playful ,
space-gobbling young lovers of the first duet . The two that
followed were much more emotionally charged .

Bahiyah Sayyed and Glenn A. Sims seemed to burn the air around
them as the lovers of the second duet , she desperate ,
crooked-limbed and clinging to his resolutely passive body . There
is a hint of resolution in the nobler third duet , danced with just
the right clarity and heroism by Uri Sands and Linda Caceres .

Staged by Mea Venana , `` Polish Pieces '' was greatly enhanced by
Keso Dekker 's jewel-colored unitards and Joop Caboort 's strong but
unobtrusive lighting . The elegant cast was completed by Asha
Thomas , Troy O'Neil Powell , Cheryl Ann Rowley , Amos J. Machanic
Jr. , Briana Reed and Askia Swift .

Ulysses Dove 's `` Episodes '' might have looked better had it not
followed Powell 's bittersweet `` Ascension , '' a subtler jazz dance
to similarly propulsive music . Nine faceless dancers stride , dash
and slide across a variety of white-lighted diagonals on the dark
stage , the women tossing their long hair and pausing to slug the
men or leap into their arms .

Eventually it all comes to seem like a postmodernist version of
Jerome Robbins ' `` Cage , '' a ballet about male-killing females . That
impression was heightened by the chill evil projected by Lynn
Barre , in a hard-dancing cast completed by Ms. Caceres , Ms. Thomas ,
Sims , Benoit-Swan Pouffer , Kristofer Storey , Jeffrey Gerodias and
Swift .

The program was completed by Ailey 's `` Revelations . ''

IN HONG KONG , MANY MARK THE MILLENNIUM AT THE RACE TRACK

How do you mark the passage of 1,000 years of human
history ? Simple , in this city of chronic gamblers and cold-eyed
oddsmakers : You head for the track .

At 12:45 a.m. , as the last wisps of smoke from New Year 's Eve
fireworks drifted away from the Happy Valley Racecourse , the crack
of a starter 's gun set off the Millennium Cup . The Hong Kong Jockey
Club billed it as the first horse race of the 2000s , though rumors
swirled that it may have been edged out for first-in-the-world
status by post-midnight races in New Zealand and Australia .

Floral Joy won $ 110,000 from a total purse worth $ 200,000 . It
was a good prize , but not extraordinary for a jockey club that
gener - ates more than $ 10 billion a season in bet - ting .

Such details did not dampen the spirits of more than 50,000
people who cheered wildly as Floral Joy streaked across the line
several lengths ahead of the next horse .

If a horse-race seems an offhand way to celebrate the ultimate
New Year 's Eve , remember that strictly speaking , the new year does
not even arrive here until February 5 , when Hong Kong and the rest
of the Chinese-speaking world will welcome the Year of the Dragon .

Considering that Hong Kong was celebrating someone else 's
holiday , it threw quite a party . The city mounted a splashy
fireworks display at Happy Valley . At the stroke of midnight ,
fireballs placed at 175-foot intervals around the track erupted
into a fountain of flames . An enormous illuminated dragon , which
the organizers described as the largest-ever , held court in the
infield .

For some Hong Kong residents , gambling seemed the only way to
celebrate the millennium . `` This is the perfect atmosphere for
racing , '' said Wilson Chan , a local businessman who lost money on
the first seven races of the evening , but was sure he would win it
all back on the main event .

Albert Cheng , a popular local radio-show host , said horse racing
symbolized stability in this former British colony , which reverted
to Chinese rule two years ago . `` Deng Xiaoping promised us that the
dancing would go on and the races would go on after the handover , ''
Cheng said , paraphrasing a now-legendary remark by the Chinese
leader .

The Millennium Cup capped an evening of festivities that also
featured performances by several of Hong Kong 's biggest film and
pop stars , including Jackie Chan , Chow Yun Fat , and Michelle Yeoh .
Chan served as the clown prince of the evening _ singing , dancing ,
and mugging with all the cheerful exuberance he brings to roughing
up bad guys in films like `` Rumble in the Bronx . ''

Of less interest to the star-crazed audience , Hong Kong Chief
Executive Tung Chee-hwa led a countdown of the final seconds of
1999 . Tung then slipped away for the Hong Kong Convention Center ,
where he caught a New Year 's Eve concert by Whitney Houston .

Ms. Houston performed at one of the evening 's hot tickets _ a
dusk-to-dawn millennium party hosted by Richard Li , the son of Hong
Kong billionaire , Li Ka-shing . The younger Li only decided to throw
the bash a month ago , and his organizers had worked frantically
around-the-clock to book marquee performers and ready a dinner for
1,000 .

Across Victoria Harbor , the Regent Hotel vied for the status of
gaudiest party . At midnight , nearly 3,000 guests gazed out of the
hotel 's floor-to-ceiling windows toward Hong Kong island , where the
already dramatic skyline had been transformed in a dizzying light
show . Brilliant hundred-foot , lighted dragons wrapped themselves
around buildings , while the numerals 2,000 flashed on several
skyscrapers .

'00 COMPUTER GLITCHES ARE MOSTLY A NO-SHOW

Despite a few sputters and glitches , the world 's computers
appear to have survived the Year 2000 rollover without major
problems _ and with humanity 's faith in technology intact , at least
for another day .

As clocks passed midnight around the world , there were a flurry
of reports of apparently minor prob - lems : a timing device at a
electric plant in Wisconsin jumped ahead 35 days , but it was
quickly reset ; a monitoring system at a Japanese nuclear plant
malfunctioned , but it did not affect the operation of the reactor ;
in Australia , ticketing ma - chines on some buses jammed .

The technology failures with L greater impact were a result of
crowding _ circuits jammed when too many people tried to make
cellu - lar phone calls in Japan , New Zea - land and elsewhere _
instead of computer software that could not fathom the year 2000 .

Yet the day arrived without the kind of catastrophic problems
once feared , like widespread power failures or planes crashing . The
computers of the U.S. power grid and air-traffic control system
rolled over to the New Year just past 7 p.m. Eastern time , which is
midnight Greenwich Mean Time , and things went without a hitch .

`` I 've never felt there was any significant chance the United
States would have any problem in its infrastructure , '' said John A.
Koskinen , chairman of the President 's Council on Year 2000
Conversion . But he cautioned against complacency in the United
States and around the world . `` There are likely to be some glitches
along the way , '' he said .

The real test , experts say , will come in the days and weeks
ahead as people return to work , as factories , offices and stores
begin normal operations . `` To look at midnight as the main event
would be a mistake , '' said David Cassano , general manager of IBM 's
Year 2000 program . `` We 'll really start to find out where we stand
in the first weeks of January as businesses run their systems for
the first time . ''

Still , expectations about the severity of the Year 2000 problem
have been scaled back sharply in recent months . The prospect of
computer failures cascading destructively across the world economy
was taken as a serious threat not long ago . But most analysts now
regard such warnings as exaggerated .

Instead , computer specialists are now watching mainly for a rash
of small , but fixable , glitches in computer programs related to the
Year 2000 problem . These problems , most analysts say , should amount
to an economic headache , not a serious illness _ though there are a
few analysts who say that a recession early this year is still
possible .

Yet around the world , fears about Y2K , as the computer problem
is known , were the exception . As he withdrew a few hundred dollars
from an automated teller machine in Rome on Friday , Federico
Pacifici , 44 , said : `` I have faith in technology . I do n't think
normal people will have any problem . ''

In Japan , the reaction was not quite so relaxed , but there was
no evidence of Year 2000 panic . Strolling through Tokyo 's Ginza
district last night , Masao Ito , 66 , observed , `` I was a bit worried
about Y2K , but I did n't think it would be a lasting problem , so I
was n't terribly concerned . ''

Japanese are accustomed to stockpiling basic goods as a
precaution against earthquakes , and the government had recommended
that citizens have extra goods on hand in case of Year 2000
breakdowns . Masato Takahashi , a student , said he had put away
enough water and food for a week . `` I 'm not expecting anything
major , '' he said . `` I just thought there might be some problem . ''

In the isolated cases of panicky reactions , the explanation
seemed more cultural than technological . In rural Thailand , for
example , the government said farmers and villagers had been
withdrawing cash from banks and clearing out food markets because
of Year 2000 fears . `` It does n't make sense , '' said Kitti
Patpongpaibul , deputy governor of the Bank of Thailand . `` Almost
none of these people own credit cards or computers . ''

Astrologers in the Thai countryside have apparently been
spreading dire Year 2000 predictions .

Globally , the more common sentiment seemed to be that of
Spaniards . Surveys have found that Spaniards are largely
unconcerned by the computer problem , known as `` Effecto 2000 '' in
Spain , and 90 percent said they had made no special preparations .
`` There 's been no panic buying here , '' said Carlos Lizana , the
manager of a Supersol supermarket in Madrid .

If the economic fallout is minimal from the Year 2000 problem ,
it will be largely because many governments and corporations
eventually listened to the dire warnings of Year 2000 readiness
advocates . And they invested more than $ 250 billion worldwide in
finding and fixing the problem .

The U.S. government alone spent $ 8.4 billion to fix the glitches
in the computers that handle everything from sending out Social
Security checks to tracking airplanes with the Federal Aviation
Administration 's air-traffic control system . The government 's
efforts accelerated sharply after Koskinen became the head of the
administration 's Year 2000 program in February 1998 .

Companies may have been slow to start _ an estimated 90 percent
of corporate fix-it spending has occurred since 1997 _ but once
they began they invested heavily to tackle their Year 2000
problems . Citigroup , for example , spent roughly $ 950 million to get
its banks , securities trading desks and insurance operations ready
for the Year 2000 rollover .

`` There have been massive investments made to address the Y2K
issue and those investments will mean that the most severe problems
should be avoided , '' said Lou Marcoccio , the Year 2000 research
director for the Gartner Group , a computer consulting and market
research firm .

The Year 2000 problem has proved so costly to try to fix because
it has been a painstaking task for thousands of people worldwide ,
searching through billions of lines of programming code , much of it
decades old . The problem dates back to before the 1960s . Back then ,
storage space on disks was scarce and costly , so programmers
routinely omitted the first two digits in year dates . The danger is
that computers will fail to interpret the `` 00 '' date as 2000 , and
shut off or malfunction .

BC-Y2K-ROUNDUP-2NDTAKE-NYT
UNDATED : or malfunction .

Around the world , the Year 2000 rollover has meant that much of
the computer industry is on around-the-clock duty , watching for
problems and ready to fix ones that do crop up . It was a quiet
watch Friday .

From her desk in Hewlett-Packard 's Year 2000 center in Palo
Alto , Calif. , Kathy Hahn filed her first status report at 3:45 a.m.
Like the reports she filed afterward , it was a green light : The
company 's field office in Auckland , New Zealand , reported that
there were no apparent problems plaguing the company 's computer
systems at night .

For Ms. Hahn , director of Hewlett-Packard 's Year 2000 planning ,
Friday 's lack of problems were a rewarding finish to nearly three
years of hard work in preparation . `` It feels like I 've been
pregnant for two and a half years , '' she said . `` I 'm feeling a
great sense of relief . ''

Edward Yardeni , a leading Wall Street economist , said it was
much too early to relax about the Year 2000 problem . Yet even he is
revising his earlier dark warnings .

In the summer of 1997 , Yardeni warned that the computer problem
could be the catalyst for a recession as severe as the 1974-75
downturn in the aftermath of the first oil shock . But he has done
some rethinking recently . `` It 's certainly not going to be as bad
as I thought it would be , '' said Yardeni , chief economist of
Deutsche Bank Securities .

Yardeni still thinks it is likely there will be a recession in
the first half of 2000 but says it will be a brief , shallow
economic dip .

Other analysts do not go that far , but they caution against
being too encouraged by the first-day reports . `` The real test is
coming in the days and weeks ahead , and I think there is a good
chance the world 's going to have a digital hangover for the three
to six months , '' said Gary Beach , publisher of CIO Magazine , who
has testified before Congress on the Year 2000 issue .

Do n't call Jim and Susan Smith survivalists .

In fact , you do n't even have to call them Jim and Susan _ those
are n't their real names .

Thing is , they do n't want their real names used . They have a
good thing _ a secure thing _ going , and they 'd just as soon not
publicize it .

They 're not digging bomb shelters and running around in
camouflage . The whole idea of locked-and-loaded Uzis and concertina
wire festooned around the perimeter and hundreds of cases of pork
and beans in the bunker gives them the creeps .

But they do intend to survive , should things get ugly in the
aftermath of Y2K . Call them , perhaps , Survivalists Lite .

They 'd prefer another term : subsistence farmers . After all , they
live in a wholly self-sufficient manner on a remote west Marin
County ridgetop , not far from San Francisco .

The steep , narrow road to their 60-acre farm is protected by a
locked gate . They grow all their own food , and their water is piped
from a spring and two wells . They heat with wood harvested from
trees grown on their property .

They 've also just completed a photovoltaic and wind system that
will keep their farm supplied with electricity , even if the
national power grid collapses .

`` We got it finished just in time , and it works beautifully , ''
said Susan Friday afternoon . `` We 're having a glass of champagne
with our solar engineer to celebrate . ''

And even if the oil refineries shut down , they 'll still be able
to farm their three acres of hillside cropland . They keep two big
draft horses on their spread , and they own a variety of horse-drawn
plows and cultivators .

The Smiths farm for both the home larder and the market _ and it
is n't easy . When they bought their hillside holding 20 years ago ,
the soil was thin and poor . They have spent the intervening years
assiduously building it up with compost and `` green manures '' _
plowed-under legumes and grasses .

`` It 's taken a lot of work , '' sighed Susan as she watched her
husband turn over ground for a raspberry patch with a walking
tractor , a kind of ultrapowerful diesel rototiller . `` And it 's
still a lot of work . ''

The Smiths also raise sheep , chickens and turkeys . All their
produce is grown organically . For the marketplace , they concentrate
on garlic and raspberries , crops that provide a fairly high yield
and generally decent price for their labor . Their vegetables come
from a large garden that 's still providing some tomatoes .

`` That 's unusual even for this part of Marin , '' she said . `` The
temperatures are generally higher up on the ridgetops than in the
valleys during the winter , but things are even warmer than usual
this year . From a farmer 's point of view , it 's kind of scary . If
our raspberries do n't go dormant , they wo n't produce any fruit next
year . ''

The Smiths take Y2K seriously and have n't been at all assured by
government and corporate assurances that everything 's going to be
hunky-dory , a few minor glitches notwithstanding .

`` I do n't think people realize the food security in this country
is nil , '' said Susan . `` If Y2K does n't cause shortages , I 'm still
convinced we 'll see them within 10 years . We 've given over our food
supply to the industrial model , and we 've lost our control , our
health and our connection to the land as a result . ''

The Smiths planned to spend New Year 's Eve entertaining some
friends with drinks and a homegrown dinner .

`` We 'll have between 12 and 20 people here , depending on who
floats through , '' said Susan .

From their ridgetop perspective , it seemed unlikely that the new
millennium will shape up much differently than the old one . As
midnight approached , the wind still soughed through the trees , and
the owls still hooted .

There was no talk of manning the ramparts in preparation for the
coming chaos . Armed defense was n't in the game plan . They do n't own
an arsenal .

`` A couple of shotguns , and that 's about it , '' observed Jim .

That 's hardly enough to deter ravening hordes from the city . But
they think _ hope , at least _ their isolation and self-sufficiency
will give them all the protection they need .

While the Smiths felt ready for Y2K , they 're not at all sure
about the rest of us . Particularly those of us who work with big ,
potentially dangerous chunks of industrial infrastructure .

`` Most of the 460 nuclear reactors in the world are n't Y2K
compliant , '' Susan said , `` and simply taking them offline may not
be enough . A plant still needs power to keep coolant over the core
to prevent radiation release . We really do n't know the state of
their backup generator systems . ''

The Smiths have focused most of their Y2K preparations on their
farm , but that is n't necessarily how they would have preferred it .

Susan served on a community committee that was convened to
devise local strategies for dealing with Y2K . She was disheartened
by the experience .

`` Basically , no one showed up at the meetings , '' she said . `` We
tried to get funding to store grain at the local fire station , but
that did n't come through . And then we tried to plant a field to
grain , but the tractor we were able to get did n't work with the
seed drill we had . There just was n't enough community interest to
get anything done . ''

Despite their concerns , the Smiths approached Y2K with more
festivity than foreboding .

Their preparations for the final countdown were upbeat , though
with a decidedly rural twist some urbanites might have found a
little too real for comfort _ such as slaughtering the turkey that
was a star feature of the repast .

After quickly decapitating the bird , Susan scalded and plucked
the carcass with the help of a couple of friends .

`` We 're going to smoke him in a pit , '' she said as she expertly
pulled some pinfeathers from the plump breast . `` He 'll be
delicious . People who have never eaten a turkey that grew up
running around , eating greens and insects , do n't really know how
good they taste . ''

Do n't call Jim and Susan Smith survivalists .

In fact , you do n't even have to call them Jim and Susan _ those
are n't their real names .

Thing is , they do n't want their real names used . They have a
good thing _ a secure thing _ going , and they 'd just as soon not
publicize it .

They 're not digging bomb shelters and running around in
camouflage . The whole idea of locked-and-loaded Uzis and concertina
wire festooned around the perimeter and hundreds of cases of pork
and beans in the bunker gives them the creeps .

But they do intend to survive , should things get ugly in the
aftermath of Y2K . Call them , perhaps , Survivalists Lite .

They 'd prefer another term : subsistence farmers . After all , they
live in a wholly self-sufficient manner on a remote west Marin
County ridgetop , not far from San Francisco .

The steep , narrow road to their 60-acre farm is protected by a
locked gate . They grow all their own food , and their water is piped
from a spring and two wells . They heat with wood harvested from
trees grown on their property .

They 've also just completed a photovoltaic and wind system that
will keep their farm supplied with electricity , even if the
national power grid collapses .

`` We got it finished just in time , and it works beautifully , ''
said Susan Friday afternoon . `` We 're having a glass of champagne
with our solar engineer to celebrate . ''

And even if the oil refineries shut down , they 'll still be able
to farm their three acres of hillside cropland . They keep two big
draft horses on their spread , and they own a variety of horse-drawn
plows and cultivators .

The Smiths farm for both the home larder and the market _ and it
is n't easy . When they bought their hillside holding 20 years ago ,
the soil was thin and poor . They have spent the intervening years
assiduously building it up with compost and `` green manures '' _
plowed-under legumes and grasses .

`` It 's taken a lot of work , '' sighed Susan as she watched her
husband turn over ground for a raspberry patch with a walking
tractor , a kind of ultrapowerful diesel rototiller . `` And it 's
still a lot of work . ''

The Smiths also raise sheep , chickens and turkeys . All their
produce is grown organically . For the marketplace , they concentrate
on garlic and raspberries , crops that provide a fairly high yield
and generally decent price for their labor . Their vegetables come
from a large garden that 's still providing some tomatoes .

`` That 's unusual even for this part of Marin , '' she said . `` The
temperatures are generally higher up on the ridgetops than in the
valleys during the winter , but things are even warmer than usual
this year . From a farmer 's point of view , it 's kind of scary . If
our raspberries do n't go dormant , they wo n't produce any fruit next
year . ''

The Smiths take Y2K seriously and have n't been at all assured by
government and corporate assurances that everything 's going to be
hunky-dory , a few minor glitches notwithstanding .

`` I do n't think people realize the food security in this country
is nil , '' said Susan . `` If Y2K does n't cause shortages , I 'm still
convinced we 'll see them within 10 years . We 've given over our food
supply to the industrial model , and we 've lost our control , our
health and our connection to the land as a result . ''

The Smiths planned to spend New Year 's Eve entertaining some
friends with drinks and a homegrown dinner .

`` We 'll have between 12 and 20 people here , depending on who
floats through , '' said Susan .

From their ridgetop perspective , it seemed unlikely that the new
millennium will shape up much differently than the old one . As
midnight approached , the wind still soughed through the trees , and
the owls still hooted .

There was no talk of manning the ramparts in preparation for the
coming chaos . Armed defense was n't in the game plan . They do n't own
an arsenal .

`` A couple of shotguns , and that 's about it , '' observed Jim .

That 's hardly enough to deter ravening hordes from the city . But
they think _ hope , at least _ their isolation and self-sufficiency
will give them all the protection they need .

While the Smiths felt ready for Y2K , they 're not at all sure
about the rest of us . Particularly those of us who work with big ,
potentially dangerous chunks of industrial infrastructure .

`` Most of the 460 nuclear reactors in the world are n't Y2K
compliant , '' Susan said , `` and simply taking them offline may not
be enough . A plant still needs power to keep coolant over the core
to prevent radiation release . We really do n't know the state of
their backup generator systems . ''

The Smiths have focused most of their Y2K preparations on their
farm , but that is n't necessarily how they would have preferred it .

Susan served on a community committee that was convened to
devise local strategies for dealing with Y2K . She was disheartened
by the experience .

`` Basically , no one showed up at the meetings , '' she said . `` We
tried to get funding to store grain at the local fire station , but
that did n't come through . And then we tried to plant a field to
grain , but the tractor we were able to get did n't work with the
seed drill we had . There just was n't enough community interest to
get anything done . ''

Despite their concerns , the Smiths approached Y2K with more
festivity than foreboding .

Their preparations for the final countdown were upbeat , though
with a decidedly rural twist some urbanites might have found a
little too real for comfort _ such as slaughtering the turkey that
was a star feature of the repast .

After quickly decapitating the bird , Susan scalded and plucked
the carcass with the help of a couple of friends .

`` We 're going to smoke him in a pit , '' she said as she expertly
pulled some pinfeathers from the plump breast . `` He 'll be
delicious . People who have never eaten a turkey that grew up
running around , eating greens and insects , do n't really know how
good they taste . ''

While much of the world partied and played , the
people of Jerusalem prayed their way into the year 2000 .

At midnight , hundreds of hymn-singing and arm-waving Christians
gathered in the Garden Tomb , one of two Jerusalem shrines that
claim to be the site of Jesus Christ 's tomb .

`` We 're hanging out in a graveyard , while others hang out in
Times Square , '' said the Rev. Wayne Hilsden , pastor of the King of
Kings Assembly , an evangelical congregation in Jerusalem . `` They 'll
wake up with a hangover . We 'll wake up redeemed in the Lord . ''

As firecrackers and louder explosives crackled and flashed at
nearby Damascus Gate , the outdoor congregation sang spirited
choruses of `` this year in Jerusalem , may your spirit descend . ''

While the messianic spirit may have descended , there were no
immediate sightings of the actual Messiah atop the Mount of Olives ,
where many Christians predict Jesus will someday return to Earth .

`` If the Messiah would have returned , it would have been neat to
see him go through the Golden Gate , '' said Jim Peters , a
candlemaker from Wausau , Wis. , referring to the now-blocked portal
through which some believe Christ will approach the Temple Mount .

Peters , who said he spent $ 2,500 just to be on the Mount of
Olives at midnight , comforted himself with this thought : `` Jesus
needs to come through the heart , '' he said , `` not the gate . ''

More than 2,500 pilgrims and local Catholics attended a Roman
Catholic service at the Church of All Nations in the Garden of
Gethsemane , followed by a candlelight procession up the Mount of
Olives .

In an extraordinary set of calendrical coincidences , Friday was
the last day of the Christian 1900s , the final Friday of the
Islamic month of Ramadan and the beginning of the weekly Jewish
Sabbath , which shuts down the Holy City like nowhere else on Earth .

Jerusalem is famous for its amazing juxtaposition of faiths and
feelings . Islamic women covered in traditional dress rub shoulders
with American tourists in shorts and Hassidic Jews wearing the same
black hats and long coats that their grandfathers donned in the
19th century .

Friday , as hundreds of thousands of Muslims chanted and bowed
around the Dome of the Rock , everyday life went on in the Jewish
Quarter , just a stone 's throw below .

Outside a rooftop cafe overlooking the packed Islamic shrine , a
violinist played a mournful version of the Frank Sinatra hit song
`` My Way . '' And if that was n't enough , noontime church bells began
ringing in the year 2000 of the Christian calendar .

Tom Jacobson , a tourist from Rohnert Park , sat dumbfounded in
the cafe , wondering whether to believe his eyes and ears .

`` I have never seen anything like this in my life , '' said
Jacobson , an associate professor in environmental studies at Sonoma
State University . `` This morning , I was at the Lion 's Gate watching
this sea of humanity walk up to the Dome of the Rock . It was
mesmerizing . It just flowed . ''

Also on hand in the narrow streets of the walled city were
thousands of heavily armed Israeli soldiers , police and special
security forces . About 7,000 officers and 5,000 police volunteers
were on the New Year 's Eve night shift _ more than four times the
usual number .

Security was especially tight at checkpoints into the prosperous
Jewish Quarter and the Western Wall , or Wailing Wall , where Jews
gather for prayer .

The eve of the year 2000 was not a particularly big deal in this
town of three calendars and three major faiths , with Christianity
the smallest of the three .

For Christians , Friday was December 31 , 1999 . For Muslims , it
was Ramadan 23 , 1420 . For Jews , it was Tevet 22 , 5760 .

`` We are very used to counting the years , '' said Amnon Lipkin
Shachak , the Israel minister of tourism . `` We are in our sixth
millennium . ''

More significantly , New Year 's Eve fell in the middle of
Shabbat , the Jewish Sabbath , which runs from sundown Friday to
sundown Saturday , and the Orthodox rabbis and religious political
parties who have enormous power in Jerusalem issued stern warnings
to observe the Sabbath .

There were no big public events scheduled in Jerusalem last
night , and the city 's Religious Council and Chief Rabbinate
threatened to withdraw the kashrut certificates from any major
hotels that had music or parties last night . Those certificates
verify that a hotel 's food and kitchens are kosher , and are
essential for doing business in the Holy City .

The low-key celebration was due in part to stringent Israeli
efforts to keep believers in apocalyptic endings at bay . In recent
weeks , Israel deported evangelical Christians who it feared could
cause trouble , and Friday , it tightened security around its
national park at Megiddo , just off the highway that connects the
ancient Roman city of Caesarea to the southern tip of the Sea of
Galilee .

Megiddo is the site mentioned in the apocalyptic Book of
Revelation for the Biblical doomsday battle of Armageddon , and it
is a growing source of fascination for evangelicals focused on
`` end times '' theology .

Although there are no churches at the site , approximately
170,000 Christian pilgrims visit the hill of Megiddo each year , and
authorities were afraid that Christian extremist groups might
target the area , or that a suicide cult might go there to usher in
the new year .

Not far from Megiddo , Angelita Galvan-Freeman , a Roman Catholic
pilgrim from Southern California , planned a New Year 's Eve sail on
the Sea of Galilee , on a wooden boat not unlike one Jesus would
have used 2,000 years ago .

Her New Year 's prayer is that Christians , Muslims and Jews will
find common ground in the millennium ahead .

`` We started as one people , '' she said , `` and we have to get
back to that root from which we all came . ''

tag Chronicle correspondent Tom Zoellner contributed to this
report from the Mount of Olives .

IN TIMES SQUARE , CELEBRANTS COME EARLY , STAY LONG

In a rainbow blizzard of confetti and a symphony of
neon and fire - works , a mighty crush of New Year 's merrymakers
welcomed the year 2000 in Times Square , the world 's most famous
intersection .

Undeterred by fears of terrorism or Y2K havoc , the Times Square
crowd showed every sign of being the biggest and noisiest ever ,
bent on watching history happen , watching themselves on huge video
screens and hoping that friends and relatives were watching them on
television at home .

After the ball atop 1 Times Square dropped at midnight , a
jubilant May - or Rudolph Giuliani admitted that he had been nervous
about the threat of terrorism or Y2K upheaval `` right until the
last minute . '' But the day 's festivities had gone without a hitch .

`` I am so proud of all the people of New York City , '' he said .
`` I am so proud of the most diverse city in the world . We can have
a great celebra - tion and we can do it peacefully and decently . ''

As the revelers whooped and hol - lered , hugged and kissed , one
couple made the ultimate hopeful statement about the new
millennium . At the stroke of midnight , Alex Buxton asked Sicely
Schiffgen to marry him , with what looked like a four-carat diamond
and platinum ring .

The most die-hard of the revelers arrived a day ahead of
schedule , camping overnight in soggy cardboard huts and sleeping
bags , unmolested by battalions of police officers , in order to
stake out prime viewing spots for the party to end all parties .

They won the bragging rights for being in Times Square at 7 in
the morning , when the year 2000 arrived in the islands of the South
Pacific , 17 time zones away . At that moment , as sani - tation
workers tried to haul away remains of the soggy campsites , the
83,000-watt Waterford crystal ball was hoisted to the top of its
tower to the strains of Copland 's `` Fanfare for the Common Man . ''

Tamar Stratyevskaya , 23 , could have used a hot shower by then .
She had spent the night in a makeshift village of cardboard
lean-tos , just the sort of encampment mayors from coast to coast
have been trying to dismantle . She had brought soda , cookies ,
noisemakers , a bottle of contraband Champagne and a quilt . When the
rain started , she moved under a movie marquee .

`` Everyone I know thought I was crazy , '' said Ms. Stratyevskaya ,
a resident of Washington Heights in upper Manhattan . `` But
actually , it 's kind of fun . ''

Other less compulsive celebrants came in waves throughout the
day : families who wanted a taste of the excitement before
nightfall , when Times Square can become a rowdy place ; immigrants
eager to ring in the New Year twice , once along with their homeland
and once in their new home ; and tourists and New Yorkers alike who
wedged themselves into spectator pens set up by the police to await
the midnight saturnalia .

As always , the college crowd , do - ing a cold-weather imitation
of spring break in Fort Lauderdale , grew wild and crazy _ or wilder
and crazier _ as the witching hour ap - proached . Mugging for the
television cameras , throwing each other in the air as if in a mosh
pit , smelling suspiciously like contraband alcohol and marijuana ,
they tirelessly wel - comed another year of hijinks .

Kamran Syed , a 19-year-old stu - dent at the University of
Southern California film school , had flown from Los Angeles by
himself to see the ball drop . `` Hoo wah ! , '' he shout - ed , noting
that he had just downed three Bombay Sapphire martinis and had been
awake for 31 hours . I 'm

Carlos Reina , another solo travel - er , who drove all the way
from north - ern Mexico , also had had too much to drink , too little
to eat and not enough sleep . `` I hope I die here , '' he said ,
swilling beer . ` I 'm so happy . ''

But not all the party animals were men . Three United Airlines
stewar-H desses were as close to the ball as a spectator could get ,
near the Armed Forces recruiting station on the nar - row traffic
island at 43rd Street sepa - rating Seventh Avenue and Broad - way .

`` I 'm cute , that 's all you need to know , '' said Nancy Lewis , 25 ,
of San Diego . `` I flirted my way past the police . That 's how I got
here . ''

In years past , the rowdy count - down to midnight was the soul of
the Times Square celebration . But for the year 2000 celebration ,
led by the Times Square Business Improve - ment District , and
consonant with the transformation of this once - squalid triangle , a
family-friendly daylong celebration was planned .

Two years in the making , with all the special effects of a
Disney movie and the bravura of a Broadway play , Times Square 2000 ,
as it was called , was an hour-by-hour , time zone-by - time zone
evocation of the cultures of each region of the world .

That made it possible for people who would never venture to
Times Square on New Year 's Eve to sample the historic party .

Erin Rogers and Troy Blakely , sweethearts living in New York for
less than a year , ventured forth from their East Side apartment
shortly before noon , the New Year in Indonesia , for a quick peek .
`` We came to see it before it got crazy , '' said Ms. Rogers , a
special education teacher . `` It was a fun feeling . And someday we
can tell people we were there at 12 . ''

Another New Yorker with an appetite only for a glimpse was Diane
Keller , a social worker , who had a simple game plan . She would stay
long enough to shoot one roll of film , for posterity , and then head
for the sales at Lord & Taylor . `` I would n't be here at night , no
way , '' Ms. Keller said . `` I 'll be home in front of my fireplace . ''

Rosalia Aragon , with her 10-year-old son and several colleagues
from work , zipped in and out of Times Square in under two hours ,
watching the New Year arrive in Southeast Asia . Then they all took
the train back to New Jersey for quiet celebrations at home .

Mrs. Aragon kept the trip a secret from her mother , who thought
it was dangerous . One of her co-workers , Ed Czekaj , came despite
the objections of his wife , who hates crowds .

`` But this way we got both worlds , '' Czekaj said . `` Boom , boom ,
just to say we were here , and then back to our families . ''

Mrs. Aragon would have liked to see her home country , Mexico ,
usher in the New Year , but that would not come until after
midnight . Kazutaka Noma and his family were luckier _ they were
able to celebrate at 10 a.m. , just as his parents were popping
champagne in Japan . A hail of pink confetti , meant to resemble
cherry blossoms , rained down on Noma , a graduate student , his wife
and their 10-year-old son .

-LRB- MORE -RRB-

nn

NEW YEAR : 10-year-old son .

Dr. Janet Mouradian , a surgical pathologist at Cornell Medical
Center and a most unlikely denizen of Times Square on this
particular night , kept herself busy editing an Armenian play ,
written by her New Year 's companion , Herand Markarian . Dr.
Mouradian , an Armenian immigrant , had braved this scene once
before , in 1964 , her first year in America .

`` I do what I enjoy in life and there 's only one millennium , ''
Dr. Mouradian said , undaunted by the crowded spectators ' pen and
the hours of waiting , which had given her time to make new , young
friends . `` He 's from Oregon , '' she said , her voice full of marvel .
`` And he 's from Alaska . And that one , next door , he 's from Ohio . ''

Looking down on the square at intervals through the day and
evening was Peter Jennings , the anchorman for ABC-TV 's 24-hour
broadcast . He would stand pressed to the bulletproof windows of the
studio , staring at the mobs below . They , in turn , would wave to
him , seeking the perfect position in front of an ABC camera so they
could simultaneously wave to the folks back home .

The pantomime was a perfect metaphor . New Year 's Eve here ,
despite the extravagant performance _ dancers , puppets , souvenirs ,
sound-and-light shows , commissioned by the Times Square Business
Improvement District _ is all about seeing and being seen . Thus the
run on camcorders at the electronics stores along Broadway . And the
posters -LRB- Mom , We Made It Fine , Trust Jesus , Sammy Loves Christine -RRB-
raised high to any camera nearby .

Yury Verduga , a salesman at an electronics store , repeated a
conversation he had had dozens of times . `` Camcorder ? $ 199 ? Let me
see it ! OK . '' Also a fast seller , Verduga said , were disposable
cameras .

Many people came prepared with supplies to keep them
comfortable , occupied and fed : beach chairs and blankets , chess
sets and mystery novels , and munchies of all kinds . One family
turned a carton upside down to make an ad hoc picnic table , then
unpacked a loaf of bread , jars of peanut butter and jelly and a
half gallon of milk .

The crowd for the most part was jolly . But not Shelley Brown ,
from Maryland , who sat sniffling and hacking in a lawn chair ,
wrapped head to toe in scarves and blankets . At her feet was an
overnight bag , stuffed with tissues and cough syrup .

Mrs. Brown had come down with the flu at the most inopportune of
times . But she did n't want to disappoint her husband , Ryan . `` I 've
been talking about this for the last seven years , '' he said . `` I
grew up watching Dick Clark on television and thought it would be
so cool . We had to be here . ''

Only a few rays of early-morning sunshine reached the aquamarine
water of Gisborne 's waterfront along Poverty Bay . But that was
enough for the ecstatic celebrants who came from around the world
to usher in the new century .

`` It was impossible to resist the idea that this would be one of
the first places to see the sun rise , '' said Chris O'Dowd of San
Francisco .

The sunrise _ whether visible or not _ was a big deal Down
Under , where locals maintain that the new year begins not at
midnight , but at dawn . Several islands of the South Pacific
jockeyed heatedly to be considered the first to see the new century
arrive . New Zealand emerged as the apparent winner , and it fell to
Gisborne , which is the most easterly city on the country 's North
Island , to show the world that this nation was worthy of the honor .

`` We 're the first to see the light , '' said lifelong Gisborne
resident Annabell Gibbons , quoting a slogan that appeared on
everything from sidewalk cobblestones to souvenir T-shirts .
`` Whether or not we actually see it does n't matter . ''

Not all visitors to New Zealand sought out the crowds . At dawn
Friday , Michael Callan sat on Tokomaru Bay , 40 miles north of the
party in Gisborne , and looked east toward home .

Callan , a Dubliner who left Ireland in June to travel the world ,
raised a beer and toasted 2000 as waves crashed ashore . `` I 'm not
into huge crowds , '' he said . `` I wanted to be alone with my
thoughts . ''

But Gisborne , at any rate , was determined to make the most of
its good fortune . The city spent three years and $ 2 million
spit-shining itself and planning festivities that included a street
party , ceremonial dances by the native Maori people , a concert by
opera singer Dame Kiri Te Kanawa , and an air show by the nation 's
air force .

The party drew far fewer than the 70,000 people city leaders
expected , but an official tally was not readily available . Still ,
New Zealand is a small place _ just 3 million people live on the
nation 's two largest islands _ and New Year 's Eve 1999 was the
biggest event this city of 35,000 has ever seen .

`` I have n't seen this many people in Gisborne in all my life , ''
said Gwendoleine Taare , who lived here for 30 years before moving
to Auckland , the nation 's largest city .

The thought of so many people _ a good number of them very drunk
_ had city leaders planning for the worst . They brought in 200
police officers from the capital city of Wellington to augment
Gisborne 's 40 cops . A refrigerator truck was ordered up to handle
any overflow in the morgue , which has room for just three corpses .

Even as Gisborne steeled itself for potential disaster _ someone
thought it necessary to have 200 caskets on hand _ the entire
country prepared for Y2K problems . Being the first to see 1999
become 2000 also meant being the first to see any computer
meltdowns .

`` The whole world is watching us '' read a front-page banner
headline on Friday 's edition of the New Zealand Herald . But in the
end , nothing happened when the clock at the center of Gisborne ,
which for the past 1000 days had been counting down the days , hours
and minutes until 2000 _ struck 12 .

`` I want to call back home to Canada to tell them that there
are n't any Y2K problems yet , '' said Richard Cloutier , a talk-show
host from Winnipeg .

After the clock struck 12 and the smoke from the fireworks
wafted away from downtown , the crowd gathered along Gisborne 's main
street migrated toward the sea to drink , dance and party some more
while awaiting the first sunbeams .

-LRB- Correspondent Kristin Bender contributed to this report . -RRB-

Houston-Chronicle-Test-HNS

Here is a test from Houston Chronicle . Please ignore this item .

End of test .

GIULIANI 'S DAY ; GETTING PEOPLE READY ; IN FRONT OF THE TUBE ; LEFT

Mayor Rudolph Giuliani , who gave himself the job of
ubiquitous master of ceremonies of the city 's New Year celebration ,
said he began his last day of the 1900s at 5:30 a.m. having trouble
getting his lights on . `` I was convinced that it was Y2K , '' the
mayor said , but `` actually I was sleepy . ''

This perhaps explains an interesting mishap that occurred later .
`` Now we 're going to go to Carl in Richmond Hill , '' Giuliani said
shortly after 11 a.m. Friday during his weekly radio call-in show .
`` Hello ? '' said Carl . `` Hillary ? '' responded the mayor , causing
listeners to think for a brief moment that perhaps the first lady
was on the line and that there would be fireworks well before the
ones scheduled at midnight . Giuliani and Mrs. Clinton are to run
against each other for U.S. Senate next year .

`` Hello ? '' said Carl again , confused .

`` Yep , '' said the mayor .

`` I 'm Carl , '' said Carl .

`` Yes , '' said the mayor . `` Wrong call . Hi , Carl . Go ahead ,
Carl . ''

`` I do n't know , you confuse me , '' said Carl , chuckling .

`` I 'm confused , '' the mayor said , `` because I was looking at the
wrong part of the screen . ''

Giuliani 's spokeswoman , Sunny Mindel , explained later that the
mayor had been looking at a computer screen displaying the next
caller 's name and the subject of the call , which was evidently
Hillary Clinton . Ms. Mindel said the mayor , who was to help flip
the switch that would drop the ball in Times Square at midnight ,
had not had a nap , did not plan to have a nap and `` has all the
sleep that he needs to have . ''

Moments earlier , Giuliani had excoriated Mrs. Clinton for being
part of the `` Clinton machine , '' the `` Arkansas kind of approach to
things . '' He concluded that `` the best thing for me to do is to do
my job the way I 've always done it , and then to try to point out to
people why , if they agree with me , I would be a more effective
senator . '' Howard Wolfson , Mrs. Clinton 's campaign spokesman , said
that if the mayor wanted `` an Academy Award nomination for his role
as the victim , he 's going to be very disappointed . ''

Giuliani spent much of his day in front of cameras . He started
at 6:40 a.m. with a news conference at the All-Star Cafe in Times
Square , then had interviews from 7 to 8 a.m. with NBC , ABC , CBS and
Fox News . He also had two news conferences at the Office of
Emergency Management 's Command Center at the World Trade Center .

Besides assuring citizens that all was under control , he said
three things : New York City is the capital of the globe , American
ideology is `` basically just taking over the entire world '' and
`` New Year 's in Auckland went really well , so we expect New Year 's
in Brooklyn will go just as well . ''

_ ELISABETH BUMILLER

GETTING THEM READY FOR THE BIG EVENT

NEW YORK _ Friday afternoon , Margaret Mullen , a 29-year-old
hairdresser at the Jean-Claude Biguine hair salon on 45th Street
and Avenue of the Americas , stared out at the thousands of people
crowded around the plate-glass windows of the salon and the conga
line of young women waiting for Ms. Mullen 's tonsorial skills at
the front desk .

`` All these people need our help , '' Ms. Mullen said wearily .

Ms. Mullen was just one of thousands of people plying the beauty
trade Friday in New York City , just a dutiful handmaiden doing the
coifing , manicuring , waxing and what not for the rest of womanhood .
But rather than playing a dour Cinderella , Ms. Mullen was happy to
be working . Her job is paid on commission , so the more hair styles
she plows through in a day , the more money she makes .

`` Last week , it was empty , '' she said . `` Everyone was away . This
week , I get to make everyone else in the world beautiful for their
parties . ''

Mariah Baker , 7 , and Catalina Baker , 10 , ate salami sandwiches
while they waited for their mother , Quita Mullan , to have her hair
washed and blown out by Ms. Mullen .

`` We want to go to Times Square , '' Mariah Baker said . `` But
Daddy wo n't let us . ''

Baker said , `` I 've tried to convince them that she and the rest
of humanity will be there . '' He looked beseechingly at his younger
daughter , and said : `` Honey , you could get squished by all those
people . ''

The room buzzed with talk of plans . Jennifer Kazawic , an
advertising executive with the Odyssey Channel , said she had
wrangled tickets to a party at MTV headquarters . Rada Tyutyunikova ,
a colorist at the salon , said she wanted to go home and sleep .

Ms. Mullen , who lives with her boyfriend , a professional
dogwalker , and her 4-year-old daughter in the Manhattan
neighborhood of Yorkville , said that her plans for tonight were
simple : she was going home to have dinner with her mother , her
boyfriend and her daughter , Kayla .

_ ALEX KUCZYNSKI

PRIMED FOR A SEAT IN FRONT OF THE TUBE

HOBOKEN , N.J. _ He was wearing a plastic , cobalt-colored top hat
advertising `` Millennium 2000 . '' She was donning a pair of plastic ,
glow-in-the-dark glasses proclaiming `` 2000 . '' And together , Jeff
and Stacy Vitale looked as if they were primed for a party for the
ages Friday night .

Their destination ? Not Times Square , since they had worked all
day in Midtown Manhattan , buying the millennial gear along the way .
Not Hoboken 's noted bar scene .

Instead , they were heading to one of the most crowded spots
Friday night in this hip city : Blockbuster Video .

`` I want to rent ` Mickey Blue Eyes , '' ' said Mrs. Vitale , a
30-year-old accountant . `` Then he 's making dinner , and we 're going
to bed . ''

The Vitales were far from lone wolves . Throughout Hoboken a
surprisingly large number of people said that they would celebrate
what was supposed to be the grandest New Year 's Eve of all time in
regular , couch-potato fashion .

All day Friday , and into the early evening hours , people were
behaving as if this night were no different than any other weekend
night : picking up groceries , grabbing some beer and wine , ordering
take-out food .

So many simply planned to have dinner with family or friends ,
uncork a good bottle of wine or port , pop in a video and then ,
comforted that Chicken Little was nowhere to be found , turn in for
a good night 's sleep before the start of the real weekend .

Some people even said that they were making a statement , of
sorts , by refusing to fall for what has been a nonstop blitz of
hype and inflated prices about millennium this , millennium that .

Besides , some people , like Cybele Emanuelle , a 28-year-old Web
designer , had to work or be on call in case something really did go
awry . So Ms. Emanuelle said it was no big deal that her evening 's
agenda included `` The Blair Witch Project , '' some goat cheese and
crackers , some take-out food .

`` It 's a Blockbuster night , '' shrugged Ms. Emanuelle , who was
eying a bottle of Champagne at Sparrow Wine & Liquor on Washington
Street . But Saturday , she added , will be a different story : she 'll
be going to a party .

_ DAVID W. CHEN

THEIR HOPES AND FEARS KNOW NO SEASON

`` If I could erase this year and do it over , I would , '' said
Anthony Boyce , a heroin addict who wanted to check into a
detoxification program and celebrate the dawn of the New Year by
sleeping through it .

`` I need to clear my head and not think about what to do next , ''
said Boyce , 47 . `` When you 're carrying a load on your shoulders 24
hours a day , it gets to where you ca n't think of a way out . ''

At the Positive Health Project , a walk-up sanctuary at 305 W.
37th St. , some of the homeless and destitute shared their modest
hopes and considerable fears as a few blocks away Times Square was
being readied for the biggest New Year 's Eve show in its history .
The project dispenses more than 13,000 clean syringes and 36,000
condoms a month , along with advice about staying healthy on the
street .

Dolores Serina , 35 , said that she had to move into a women 's
shelter after her husband went to prison for selling drugs and city
officials declared their basement room an illegal dwelling .
Although she said she was in a methadone program to battle her
craving for heroin , Ms. Serina had to leave her 4-month-old son
with her mother-in-law until she can scrape up money for an
apartment . `` Going into the New Year , I 'm scared , '' Ms. Serina
said , as she huddled against her companion , Rolando Morales , 25 ,
whose drug-injecting left him HIV-positive .

`` A lot of these people have n't slept last night , '' Ms. Serina
said . `` They depend on this place for safety . ''

For the first time , the project 's executive director closed the
needle exchange and other services this New Year 's Eve for fear
that his drug users would get swept up by the officers patrolling
the celebration at Times Square .

Mrs. Serina said , `` I look around and I see people spending
money on all these little gizmo-gadgets and I say , ` My God , if they
only gave me a dollar , I 'd be all right . '' '

_ CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

NEW YORK CITY POLICE OUT IN FULL STRENGTH

Saddling up all its horses , putting all its
helicopters in the air and sending nearly all its officers out on
the street in uniform , the New York City Police Department on
Friday mounted one of the biggest security operations in its
history in hopes of keeping the New Year 's Eve celebrations safe .

Some 8,000 police officers _ a force larger than that of most of
the country 's municipal police departments _ blanketed Times Square
alone for the most famous and symbolic gathering , but the police
also had to cover 328 other officially scheduled celebrations .
Major events were scheduled in all five boroughs , including a
gathering of tens of thousands of people at Grand Army Plaza in
Brooklyn .

In all , 37,000 police officers were to be on duty over New
Year 's Eve and into the morning of Jan. 1 . Days off had been
canceled , and detectives and others who normally work in plain
clothes were put back onto the street in uniforms . All six police
helicopters circled over the city , and all 102 horses in the
mounted unit were saddled up .

The police were planning for a crowd in Times Square at least
twice the size of the million people who gathered there the year
before . As tens of thousands of early arrivals poured into the area
in midafternoon , the police were constantly adjusting their
barricades , creating a series of frozen zones from 43rd Street
north along the legs of Broadway and Seventh Avenue as far as 59th
Street .

As the crowd swelled , the plan was to seal off additional areas
south of 42nd Street , where there was a good view of the crystal
ball whose fall would ring in 2000 , and areas along the Avenue of
the Americas and Eighth Avenue where it could be seen on giant
television screens .

Some 700 undercover officers mingled with the crowd , on the
lookout for troublemakers or possible terrorists . Bomb-sniffing
dogs were also in the area to search for explosives . As in past
years , the police were under strict orders to confiscate any
alcoholic beverages , a measure that officials say has cut
disorderly conduct during the once-rowdy celebration to negligible
levels .

Much of the concern in recent days had been over the possibility
of a terrorist attack . In the Times Square area , manholes were
welded shut , steel trash cans removed and mailboxes locked . Cars
entering garages in the area over the last few days were searched
as a condition of parking . There were also spot searches of
motorists entering the city through the tunnels .

Concerns over terrorism mounted sharply on Thursday with the
arrest in Brooklyn of a 31-year-old Algerian , Abdel Ghani , who the
FBI charged was an accomplice of Ahmed Ressam , the Algerian charged
with trying to smuggle powerful explosives and four sophisticated
timing devices across the border near Seattle on Dec. 14 .

Even as a black-clad anti-terrorist task force stormed the
shabby Brooklyn apartment block where it had tracked Ghani by a
scrap of paper with his phone number found on Ressam , federal
agents in a half-dozen other cities questioned , and in some cases
detained , people they believed had some connection to Ressam .

But Mayor Rudolph Giuliani , Police Commissioner Howard Safir and
FBI officials here and in Washington said they had no specific
knowledge of any terrorist plot aimed at New York City .

The Police Department plan , code-named Archangel , was three
years in the making . It put the department on its highest alert and
included detailed methods for responding to and investigating
terrorist acts , including biological and chemical assaults .

In addition to the threat of terrorism , the police also prepared
for power failures or other problems that might be caused by
computer failures associated with the Year 2000 problems .

Special emergency teams were stationed in each borough with
trucks equipped with banks of lights , generators and special tools
for freeing people trapped in elevators in the event of a power
failure .

The Police Department purchased large amounts of equipment to
prepare for New Year 's Eve , including extra lighting trucks for
working in the dark , and some $ 65,000 worth of interlocking metal
barricades for crowd control . Each precinct was equipped with a
supply of portable electric generators . An extra three-month supply
of flashlights and batteries were stashed away , and individual
officers were even issued chemical illumination sticks that light
up when twisted .

NIGHT OF STARS FOR WASHINGTON MILLENNIUM CELEBRATION

Stars rained over the nation 's capital on New
Year 's eve as President Clinton ushered in the new year by lighting
a fuse that sent a thundering shower of brilliant white stars
cascading down the sides of the Washington Monument .

`` Tonight , the torch passed to a new century of young
Americans , '' Clinton told the more than 200,000 people gathered on
the National Mall to ring in the Year 2000 . `` Tonight , we celebrate
the change of centuries and the dawning of a new millennium . ''

Amid tight security , the crowd enjoyed relatively balmy weather
_ the temperature was in the higher 30s _ and seemed unconcerned
about any terrorist threats .

Most of the crowd had gathered in front of the Lincoln Memorial
hours earlier to get good seats for the splashy , 3-hour `` America 's
Millennium Gala , '' a live television program hosted by rapper Will
Smith .

The show included performances by singers Bono from the Irish
pop band U2 , Tom Jones , Don McLean , opera singer Kathleen Battle ,
country singers Kenny Rogers , Kathy Mattea and Trisha Yearwood ,
`` Ragtime '' star Brian Stokes Mitchell , and the cast from
Broadway 's 25-member `` Stomp . '' But the evening 's most captivating
production began in the final half-hour of 1999 .

Shortly before the midnight hour , Steven Spielberg presented his
18-minute film , `` Unfinished Journey , '' which was shown on three
55-foot high projection screens erected beside the reflecting pool .
As scenes of America 's past were shown on the screens , U.S. poet
laureate Robert Pinsky , former laureate Rita Dove and author-poet
Maya Angelou read poems written for the film . An original musical
score by composer John Williams who conducted his own orchestration
accompanied the readings .

Following the film , the president addressed the crowd and the
American people .

Then , with just 20 seconds left before midnight , a group of
children standing at the west end of the Reflecting Pool in front
of the Lincoln Memorial lit the fuse that burned its way along the
length of the pool , ending at the base of the Washington Monument ,
now surrounded by an elaborate scaffold because of refurbishing
work .

Then , at 11:59:50 p.m. , 10 successive bursts of brilliant white
rained down the sides of the monument , each 55 feet above the one
before it , as the Mall revelers counted down the seconds to
midnight . At that moment , the entire monument exploded with a
stunning waterfall of white stars .

But the show was n't over yet . After the final blast of stars , a
giant Ferris wheel rose 175 feet into the air behind the Lincoln
Memorial . With more than 500 stage lights , the circle of beams
formed a sun to blaze in the New Year .

-LRB- STORY COULD END HERE . OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS . -RRB-

Earlier in the evening , the president and First Lady Hillary
Rodham Clinton hosted a glitzy White House dinner to honor
America 's artists , inventors , scientists and scholars .

About 500 guests descended upon the White House for the
`` Creator 's Dinner , '' including such famous faces as Muhammad Ali ,
Elizabeth Taylor and Robert De Niro .

After receiving the guests , the president toasted the crowd and
praised America 's `` endless capacity to express freedom and
creativity . ''

Some of the guests were seated outside in a heated tent in the
Rose Garden .

Only a select 320 people held invitations to sit with the
president and first lady in the East Room and State Dining Room
inside the White House .

Among those chosen to sit down with the Clintons were Ali ,
Taylor , De Niro , opera divas Jessye Norman and Kathleen Battle ,
historian Arthur Schlesinger , concert violinist Itzhak Perlman ,
playwright Neil Simon , and actors Jack Nicholson and Mary Tyler
Moore . The tables , draped with velvet tablecloths , were set with
white china with a silver band . In the middle of each table was a
solid silver bowl filled with white Phalenopsis orchids , white
roses , white sparkle holly and crystal balls . Adorning each silver
bowl was a silver candlestick with white tapers .

Waited on by 160 butlers , diners feasted on beluga caviar ,
lobster , foie gras and oyster velout , served with Sterling
Chardonnay , before moving on to the main course of truffle
marinated rack of lamb , roasted artichoke and pepper rogo ' t and
crispy garlic polenta served with Dehlinger Pinot Noir . The dinner
ended with a chocolate and champagne delight , served with Iron
Horse Brut champagne .

After the dinner , the Clintons and their guests traveled via
shuttle vans to the Lincoln Memorial for gala . After the show , the
first couple returned to the White House for another party with
about 1,000 guests that was expected to last until around 4 a.m.For
those revelers who make it , the White House party was scheduled to
end with breakfast `` a little before dawn , '' according to Toby
Graff , spokeswoman for the first lady .

WORLD ROLLS SMOOTHLY INTO NEW YEAR

The eastern half of the United States smoothly
followed the rest of the world into the new century early Saturday
with only a smattering of minor Y2K glitches reported .

Slot machines in Delaware went bonkers and clocks at a Wisconsin
electricity plant went haywire , as if to highlight the lack of
serious problems in the nation .

`` We have seen no indications of any significant Y2K problems , ''
said John Koskinen , chief of the White House 's Y2K command center ,
based on reports from the Eastern and Central time zones .

He reported some congestion on telephone networks on the East
Coast as the clock moved past midnight . `` Some people have received
messages that all circuits are busy , '' he said , referring to the
` Mother 's Day effect '' of heavy telephone use .

Earlier Friday , Koskinen reported that about 150 slot machines
at three Delaware race tracks temporarily shut down Thursday night
after the slots ' time-based computer chips _ programmed to read
three days ahead _ became confused when they rolled over to 2000 .
The slots were quickly repaired . In Wisconsin the clocks _ which
went down Friday at 7 p.m. EST _ were quickly reset and no one lost
power .

Koskinen and a host of other top government officials gave
upbeat reports all day Friday and early Saturday as the new year
swept across most of the globe .

On Friday , Asia , Russia and Europe preceded the United States
into the new century . Countries such as China , Russia and Ukraine
rolled into Jan. 1 without problems in their nuclear power plants
and other key systems that U.S. officials had feared might shut
down as a result of a Y2K computer glitch . Officials cautioned ,
however , that problems could still crop up in coming days . Monday
was cited as a crucial milestone because it will be the first day
of normal business operations following the long holiday weekend .

The biggest reported Y2K problem overseas was with a Japanese
nuclear plant . The Shika Nuclear Power Station about 170 miles
northwest of Tokyo , lost its radiation alarm system shortly after
midnight there . Energy Secretary Bill Richardson described the
system as a backup system and said it did not affect plant safety .

The United States experienced its first Y2K tests at 7 p.m. EST
Friday , when computers that control airline traffic , about
one-third of the nation 's power grid and military operations
appeared to roll over into the new year without incident . The
computers are based on Greenwich Mean Time , which is five hours
ahead of the Eastern Standard Time zone .

`` The nation 's airspace system is up and running safely , ''
Federal Aviation Administration chief Jane Garvey said . She was
aboard a jet traveling from Washington , D.C. , to Dallas when air
traffic computers passed midnight GMT .

Even before parts of the U.S. crossed into the new millenium ,
Koskinen predicted the country would easily weather the transition
into the New Year .

`` I have never felt that there was any significant chance that
the United States would have would have a major problem in the
infrastructure , either nationally or regionally , '' he said .

But , he said , the fact that virtually all of the world moved
into the new year without any problems should not lead to anyone to
` underestimate the nature of the problem that was originally
there . ''

` Had the effort not been made , had the money not been spent , we
would be in a very different situation than we find ourselves in
right now , '' he said .

The Commerce Department estimates that some $ 100 billion was
spent in the United States over the past five years to fix the Y2K
problem _ which would occur if computers interpreted the digits
`` 00 '' as 1900 rather than 2000 . Worldwide is it estimated that
governments and private industry spent close to $ 400 billion fixing
its computers .

Early good news came to the White House center as New Year 's eve
slipped past midnight in Western Pacific time zones first . For
example , New Zealand celebrated the arrival of the New Year 18
hours before Washington , D.C. . As Japan , Australia and other nations
joined the '00 honor roll , optimism grew at the White House Y2K
coordination center that years of preparedness were paying off .

Thomas Pickering , the No. 2 person at the State Department ,
reported that all 29 of Russia 's nuclear power plants passed into
the new year without incident , a reassuring note because of concern
about Russia 's attention to the Y2K issue and its aging nuclear
reactors .

L.A. 'S PARTIES FAIL TO DRAW

Los Angeles ' city parties and concerts on New Year 's Eve were a
dud of millennial proportions Friday , drawing far smaller crowds of
revelers than expected .

A rare rainstorm coupled with Y2K boredom and uncertainty kept
much of Los Angeles home from the five city parties , and even The
Eagles concert failed to fill the Staples Center and left scalpers
eating high-priced tickets .

At the city 's icon , the Hollywood sign , the laser light show and
fireworks displays were nixed . Officials gave contradictory
explanations for why they were canceled and why officials continued
to promote the events until the last minute .

`` We 're in a very dry season , '' said Deputy Mayor Noelia
Rodriguez , explaining the fireworks cancellations . `` The fire
hazards certainly played into it . The last thing we need is to
torch the Hollywood sign . ''

The Federal Aviation Administration told the city two weeks ago
it could not stage a laser light show , according to Riordan
spokeswoman Jessica Copen . But other officials said it was because
the lasers did n't work well on TV and film .

Riordan and Jay Leno were scheduled to throw the switch to light
the signs before a worldwide television audience .

Elsewhere , the rain cut short several party performances .

`` It 's not exactly what we wanted , because of the rain , '' said
Al Nodal , the city cultural affairs director , as he dodged puddles
at the city 's downtown festival . `` It 's just sort of spotty . ''

Despite that , many partygoers were undaunted , enjoying the line
dancing , skydivers , gospel singers and an array of activities .

City officials said attendance could have reached about 400,000
at the five venues . There was capacity for 15,000 people at any one
time at the Van Nuys Airport , where a daylong crowd of 45,000 was
expected but only a few hundred showed up at any one time .

Parties also were thrown in Crenshaw , Grand Avenue downtown , San
Pedro and the Alameda district .

`` San Pedro has been building slowly all day . The Crenshaw is
rolling right now . Alameda has been going full-blast

they 're real troupers , '' Nodal said .

At the `` San Fernando Valley Spectacular '' at the Van Nuys
Airport , several hundred people got a jump on New Year 's
festivities at the family themed outing featuring mass line
dancing , kids ' crafts , carnival rides and music .

About 900 people were in attendance by early evening , officials
said .

`` It 's really great that this was pulled off for the people of
the city , '' said Carol Brotman , 44 , of Northridge .

From noon on , the free city-sponsored event drew a steady stream
of partygoers bundled in ski jackets , scarves and gloves .

The unexpected wet weather kept musicians from taking the stage
and quashed a planned BMX bike jump demonstration .

`` Everyone 's in a real party spirit , '' said Mary Passantino of
Canyon Country , one of the 500 or so line dancers to mark the
millennium to Dwight Yoakam 's `` Fast As You '' in an old National
Guard hanger . `` It 's a real nice way for people to get together . ''

Bob Levy , who grew up in Encino and now lives in San Jose ,
brought his mother , his wife , Judy , and their three children to the
party .

`` My favorite thing is the dancing , said 8-year-old Rachel .

Her brothers , 10-year-old Eric and 8-year-old Aaron were busy
slugging it out with long , padded poles in an inflatable gladiator
game .

`` This is great , '' Levy said . `` I think the kids will last until
midnight . It 's a big enough event . ''

Backstage , 10-year-old Christian McDonald and the 40-member
choir from the Church on the Way in Van Nuys were eager to perform .
They were to join choirs at the four other L.A. millennial venues
in singing a prophetic 1899 hymn , `` A Hundred Years From Now . ''

`` This is real exciting , '' said Christian of Valencia . `` I think
the future is going to change a lot . Pollution is going to stop ,
and I think the world is just going to be a better place . ''

`` Airwolf '' TV star Jan-Michael Vincent , grand marshal of the
Valley spectacular , joined the dancers for a few steps .

`` I 'm not much of a line dancer , but I sure can do the country
swing , '' Vincent said .

About 40 volunteers joined 85 private security guards and more
than 100 Los Angeles police officers in keeping the event running
smoothly .

Tustin resident Bob Shea drove his wife and four children to the
airport spectacular as a prelude to the Rose Parade .

`` Everything you can do on the millennium New Year 's Eve is
geared to adults _ dancing , nightclubs _ but this was the best
thing for families , '' said Shea , a former Los Angeles resident .

Organizers had said they wanted to use the sky above Los Angeles
to unify the city and link the five festivals , but the gray and
cloudy weather interfered .

A skywriter wrote `` LA 2000 '' over the San Pedro festival about
noon , but gathering clouds covered it . Nodal said the rest of the
`` air promenade '' continued as planned , with planes , blimps and
skydivers .

-LRB- STORY CAN END HERE . OPTIONAL 2ND TAKE FOLLOWS . -RRB-

-LRB- For use by NYTimes News Service clients -RRB-

Thousands ventured to the Staples Center to wind down the 1900s
with The Eagles , Linda Ronstadt and Jackson Browne , in a concert
featuring pillars of the L.A. music scene .

Outside the Staples Center , ticketholders for the Eagles seemed
to be in good spirits even as they waited in the chilly drizzle .
The clothing ran the gamut , from jeans to business suits to ...
Star Wars outfits , as they came for one reason : to indulge in a bit
of nostalgia .

`` I decided to do something I 've never done before to ring out
the New Year , '' said Andrew Milinkevich , a Thousand Oaks attorney
dressed in a Darth Maul costume .

Scalpers offered $ 750 tickets for $ 500 with no takers , while
others could n't get rid of even $ 50 tickets .

Doors were supposed to open at 6 p.m. , but stayed closed until
after 7 p.m. Concertgoers faced metal-detector wands , and guards
checked cell phones to see if they were working models .

Much of the audience missed the opening act , Ronstadt , who
performed for only 20 minutes .

Alan Gould of Woodland Hills said : `` A lot of people around me
are angry . My friends and I paid $ 750 for our tickets and feel that
we missed a third of the concert . ''

But that did n't deter Richard Benavides , who waited to get in
with his wife , 12-year-old son and 10-year-old twins . The family
drove from College Station , Texas , with the concert being the
highlight of their L.A. visit . It was the first rock concert for
his children . `` My wife and I did n't want to leave them home . ...
This is a real special occasion . ''

Security was tight at Universal City , where three events were
going on at the CityWalk , a swing dance party starting at 9 p.m. at
Universal Studios and the Jimmy Buffett concert at the Universal
Amphitheatre .

Tickets for the Buffett nine-hour event went for $ 500 to $ 1,500 .
He was to begin performing at 10 p.m. . The party was to continue
until 4 a.m. Lines stretched blocks long to get into the
amphitheater .

SAYING GOODBYE : A MAN WHO RODE A TANK BECAME THE MAN ON HORSEBACK

When Boris Yeltsin unveiled his millennium surprise on New
Year 's Eve , he used the word `` power '' five times in his brief
retirement speech .

When Lenin issued his famous call to revolution on Oct. 24 ,
1917 , he also used the word `` power '' five times . Lenin was getting
ready to seize it . Yeltsin , who will go down in history as the man
who toppled the totalitarian system Lenin wrought , said he was
relinquishing it .

Yet power , and the thirst for it , is the connection between two
Russian leaders who only a few years ago symbolized opposite
extremes .

As was clear from the moment he mentioned his anointed
successor , Vladimir Putin -LRB- `` I have no doubt what choice you will
make at the end of March 2000 '' -RRB- , Yeltsin left office not to
protect the fragile democracy that brought about his election in
1992 but to preserve the power that his administration came to
revere above all else .

As political theater , it was a classic Yeltsin move _
unpredictable but shrewd . Yeltsin no doubt realized that Putin 's
surge in popularity , based on public support for a military
crackdown in Chechnya , might not last until June , when elections
were supposed to take place . By then , enough soldiers will have
come home in body bags to contradict the promise of a clean , easy
victory _ as they did the last time Yeltsin tried to impose Russian
might on the rebel republic .

`` Why hold on to power for another six months ? '' Yeltsin said ,
with a straight face . `` No , this is not me , this is not in my
character . ''

Holding on to power , against all odds , has been the one steady
feature of Yeltsin 's remarkably inconsistent tenure as president .
And that too is not all that surprising . Power has been the driving
force of Russian politics since the time of the czars , through the
Soviet Union and beyond . For all the mistakes and misjudgments that
Yeltsin conceded and regretted , he never lost sight of what matters
in Russia . Russians have been so broken for so long that they have
learned to respond only to an iron fist , and Yeltsin played to that
instinct again and again , taking on the role of the autocrat as
nimbly as he had turned himself into a democrat when the Soviet
Empire began to topple .

Over the past few years , the West has mainly seen Yeltsin
through the prism of news clips , embarrassing shots of him toppling
over at official ceremonies , frugging at a rock concert or
recovering from heart surgery in a government dacha . Russians have
also seen him act out rituals that date to the czars , shaking his
finger at quaking local bureaucrats , ordering them to raise wages
that Moscow had already cut back .

He came to public notice in the late 1980s as a populist who
rode public buses and hectored party officials , but he seamlessly
recast himself as an age-old Kremlin ruler , surrounded by
sycophants and bodyguards , allowing corruption to flourish at the
highest levels .

During the coup of 1991 , when Yeltsin stood on a tank to defy
the old Soviet guard into history , he created one of the most
electrifying moments in the recent past .

But when he took over , he ruled by contradiction . He fired
scores of advisers , rehired many and fired them again _ and again .

Anatoly Chubais , a former deputy prime minister who is viewed by
the West as the last guarantor of free-market rules , was kicked in
and out of power . So was Boris Berezovsky , the crafty tycoon who
symbolizes the entrenched business interests that want to impose
their own rule on the Russian market . Yeltsin deserves credit for
seeking to introduce real economic freedom in a country that never
experienced it , but he will also be remembered as the ruler who
oversaw the birth of Russia 's plutocracy .

He will get credit for leaving the Kremlin voluntarily ,
something no one in Russian history had ever done , except Mikhail
Gorbachev _ at a time when Yeltsin had the upper hand and had left
him no choice .

But this was not like a broken Lyndon Johnson refusing to run
for a second term . Yeltsin wants to be succeeded by someone whose
loyalty will last and will not hound him in retirement with
criminal charges , financial restraints or just lese majeste . Putin
remains unproven as a leader . For now , he mainly represents
Yeltsin 's desire to keep his grip on Russia 's future _ and preserve
his own .

Or , as Lenin put it in 1917 , `` the seizure of power is the
business of the uprising ; its political purpose will become clear
after the seizure . ''

SAYING GOODBYE : A MAN WHO RODE A TANK BECAME THE MAN ON HORSEBACK

When Boris Yeltsin unveiled his millennium surprise on New
Year 's Eve , he used the word `` power '' five times in his brief
retirement speech .

When Lenin issued his famous call to revolution on Oct. 24 ,
1917 , he also used the word `` power '' five times . Lenin was getting
ready to seize it . Yeltsin , who will go down in history as the man
who toppled the totalitarian system Lenin wrought , said he was
relinquishing it .

Yet power , and the thirst for it , is the connection between two
Russian leaders who only a few years ago symbolized opposite
extremes .

As was clear from the moment he mentioned his anointed
successor , Vladimir Putin -LRB- `` I have no doubt what choice you will
make at the end of March 2000 '' -RRB- , Yeltsin left office not to
protect the fragile democracy that brought about his election in
1992 but to preserve the power that his administration came to
revere above all else .

As political theater , it was a classic Yeltsin move _
unpredictable but shrewd . Yeltsin no doubt realized that Putin 's
surge in popularity , based on public support for a military
crackdown in Chechnya , might not last until June , when elections
were supposed to take place . By then , enough soldiers will have
come home in body bags to contradict the promise of a clean , easy
victory _ as they did the last time Yeltsin tried to impose Russian
might on the rebel republic .

`` Why hold on to power for another six months ? '' Yeltsin said ,
with a straight face . `` No , this is not me , this is not in my
character . ''

Holding on to power , against all odds , has been the one steady
feature of Yeltsin 's remarkably inconsistent tenure as president .
And that too is not all that surprising . Power has been the driving
force of Russian politics since the time of the czars , through the
Soviet Union and beyond . For all the mistakes and misjudgments that
Yeltsin conceded and regretted , he never lost sight of what matters
in Russia . Russians have been so broken for so long that they have
learned to respond only to an iron fist , and Yeltsin played to that
instinct again and again , taking on the role of the autocrat as
nimbly as he had turned himself into a democrat when the Soviet
Empire began to topple .

Over the past few years , the West has mainly seen Yeltsin
through the prism of news clips , embarrassing shots of him toppling
over at official ceremonies , frugging at a rock concert or
recovering from heart surgery in a government dacha . Russians have
also seen him act out rituals that date to the czars , shaking his
finger at quaking local bureaucrats , ordering them to raise wages
that Moscow had already cut back .

He came to public notice in the late 1980s as a populist who
rode public buses and hectored party officials , but he seamlessly
recast himself as an age-old Kremlin ruler , surrounded by
sycophants and bodyguards , allowing corruption to flourish at the
highest levels .

During the coup of 1991 , when Yeltsin stood on a tank to defy
the old Soviet guard into history , he created one of the most
electrifying moments in the recent past .

But when he took over , he ruled by contradiction . He fired
scores of advisers , rehired many and fired them again _ and again .

Anatoly Chubais , a former deputy prime minister who is viewed by
the West as the last guarantor of free-market rules , was kicked in
and out of power . So was Boris Berezovsky , the crafty tycoon who
symbolizes the entrenched business interests that want to impose
their own rule on the Russian market . Yeltsin deserves credit for
seeking to introduce real economic freedom in a country that never
experienced it , but he will also be remembered as the ruler who
oversaw the birth of Russia 's plutocracy .

He will get credit for leaving the Kremlin voluntarily ,
something no one in Russian history had ever done , except Mikhail
Gorbachev _ at a time when Yeltsin had the upper hand and had left
him no choice .

But this was not like a broken Lyndon Johnson refusing to run
for a second term . Yeltsin wants to be succeeded by someone whose
loyalty will last and will not hound him in retirement with
criminal charges , financial restraints or just lese majeste . Putin
remains unproven as a leader . For now , he mainly represents
Yeltsin 's desire to keep his grip on Russia 's future _ and preserve
his own .

Or , as Lenin put it in 1917 , `` the seizure of power is the
business of the uprising ; its political purpose will become clear
after the seizure . ''

NEWS OF THE WEEK IN REVIEW

A Rough Night on the Town

Sean `` Puffy '' Combs has the indisputable ability to attract
attention . The rap impresario throws lavish parties , drapes himself
in furs and jewelry , dates movie star Jennifer Lopez and all but
begs people to look his way . Some say this is a job requirement for
a hip-hop star ; others find it a tad excessive .

Last week Combs , 30 , attracted more attention _ the unwanted
kind _ when he was arrested after an early-morning shootout in a
Manhattan nightclub . The arrest led to inevitable newspaper
photographs depicting Combs skulking away from a police station .

Police say a club patron taunted Combs by throwing a wad of
money at the multimillionaire . Combs and a young protege pulled out
guns , they say , but only the protege pulled his trigger . Three
bystanders were shot and wounded in the confusion that ensued ,
while Combs and Ms. Lopez fled in a sports-utility vehicle that ran
11 red lights before being pulled over .

Police said they found a gun in the car that had not been fired ,
but it was loaded _ and stolen . Combs , his driver and his bodyguard
were charged with criminal possession of a weapon , while his
protege was charged with attempted murder . Combs later held a news
conference to strongly deny having anything to do with the shootout
or with guns .

Still , the episode resurrected doubts about the rap star 's
judgment . In April , for example , Combs and two associates beat up a
record executive who had angered him ; he later pleaded guilty to a
violation . The arrest also comes at a time when record sales for
his Bad Boy Entertainment empire have slipped .

As for questions about Combs ' performance as a role model , his
friend and business colleague , Andre Harrell , said , `` When you
judge Sean against his peers , he 's not doing such a bad job . ''

_ DAN BARRY

A Cold War Relic Signs Off

For schoolchildren in the 1950s or '60s , there were few sounds
more terrifying than the wail of an air raid siren . No matter that
it was only a test : The sound will forever conjure up visions of
Soviet jets and mushroom clouds .

But 50 years after cities from coast to coast installed the
early warning systems , the sirens have become little more than
annoying relics of the Cold War . This year , Baltimore will become
the latest city to abandon the system and its tests of 122 sirens
that blared from speakers around town each Monday at 1 p.m. . A new
network of radio-controlled sirens , which do not require routine
testing , will be installed to alert people to impending natural
disasters or terrorist attacks .

Other cities have put the old systems to similar use .
Tornado-prone Omaha tests its system once a month , and San
Francisco , which is prone to earthquakes , runs a test every Tuesday
at noon . But why anyone would need a siren to tell them that there
had been an earthquake is an open question .

_ JANE FRITSCH

China Sentences 4 Members Of Spiritual Group

Sending a harsh message to followers of the Falun Gong spiritual
movement , Chinese authorities gave prison sentences ranging from 7
to 18 years to three men and a woman who were said to be top
organizers . Last summer the government declared the group an `` evil
cult '' after 10,000 members mounted an illegal demonstration in
Beijing .

Two of the sentences _ 18 years for one defendant and 16 years
for another _ were stiffer than those meted out to democracy
advocates in the last several years , a sign of how frightened the
government is of a movement that has attracted millions of
citizens .

_ ERIK ECKHOLM

Challengers Pull in Funds

Sen. John McCain and former Sen. Bill Bradley , the surging
presidential challengers , reported surprisingly strong fund-raising
totals for the final three months of the year , matching their
climbing poll ratings in New Hampshire .

McCain took in $ 6.1 million and Bradley received $ 8 million ,
compared to only $ 4 million for Vice President Al Gore . Texas Gov.
George Bush continued his dominance of the money chase , collecting
$ 10 million in the fourth quarter of 1999 and entering the 2000
primary season with $ 31.4 million in the bank .

_ JOHN M. BRODER

Inquiry Into Kohl Funds

Prosecutors have started a criminal investigation into secret
bank accounts used by former German Chancellor Helmut Kohl to
collect and distribute at least $ 1 million in allegedly illegal
political contributions during the past decade .

The investigation marks a low point for Kohl , who was chancellor
from 1982 until 1998 and who engineered the reunification of
Germany . If found guilty of embezzlement or fraud , Kohl could
theoretically face a prison term of up to five years .

_ EDMUND L. ANDREWS

Violence Visits a Beatle

Anyone who was once a Beatle , even the `` quiet '' one , can never
fade away and live a simple life _ no matter how big the mansion ,
how high the walls . George Harrison learned that in a spasm of
violence , one with echoes of John Lennon 's murder nearly two
decades ago .

An intruder _ obsessed with the Beatles to the point of
believing they were witches _ broke into Harrison 's home outside
London and stabbed him in the chest , also slightly injuring his
wife , Olivia . Harrison should recover from the resulting lung
injury , his surgeon said , in a matter of weeks .

_ HUBERT B. HERRING

-LRB- MORE -RRB-

nn

NEWS OF THE WEEK IN REVIEW

A Rough Night on the Town

Sean `` Puffy '' Combs has the indisputable ability to attract
attention . The rap impresario throws lavish parties , drapes himself
in furs and jewelry , dates movie star Jennifer Lopez and all but
begs people to look his way . Some say this is a job requirement for
a hip-hop star ; others find it a tad excessive .

Last week Combs , 30 , attracted more attention _ the unwanted
kind _ when he was arrested after an early-morning shootout in a
Manhattan nightclub . The arrest led to inevitable newspaper
photographs depicting Combs skulking away from a police station .

Police say a club patron taunted Combs by throwing a wad of
money at the multimillionaire . Combs and a young protege pulled out
guns , they say , but only the protege pulled his trigger . Three
bystanders were shot and wounded in the confusion that ensued ,
while Combs and Ms. Lopez fled in a sports-utility vehicle that ran
11 red lights before being pulled over .

Police said they found a gun in the car that had not been fired ,
but it was loaded _ and stolen . Combs , his driver and his bodyguard
were charged with criminal possession of a weapon , while his
protege was charged with attempted murder . Combs later held a news
conference to strongly deny having anything to do with the shootout
or with guns .

Still , the episode resurrected doubts about the rap star 's
judgment . In April , for example , Combs and two associates beat up a
record executive who had angered him ; he later pleaded guilty to a
violation . The arrest also comes at a time when record sales for
his Bad Boy Entertainment empire have slipped .

As for questions about Combs ' performance as a role model , his
friend and business colleague , Andre Harrell , said , `` When you
judge Sean against his peers , he 's not doing such a bad job . ''

_ DAN BARRY

A Cold War Relic Signs Off

For schoolchildren in the 1950s or '60s , there were few sounds
more terrifying than the wail of an air raid siren . No matter that
it was only a test : The sound will forever conjure up visions of
Soviet jets and mushroom clouds .

But 50 years after cities from coast to coast installed the
early warning systems , the sirens have become little more than
annoying relics of the Cold War . This year , Baltimore will become
the latest city to abandon the system and its tests of 122 sirens
that blared from speakers around town each Monday at 1 p.m. . A new
network of radio-controlled sirens , which do not require routine
testing , will be installed to alert people to impending natural
disasters or terrorist attacks .

Other cities have put the old systems to similar use .
Tornado-prone Omaha tests its system once a month , and San
Francisco , which is prone to earthquakes , runs a test every Tuesday
at noon . But why anyone would need a siren to tell them that there
had been an earthquake is an open question .

_ JANE FRITSCH

China Sentences 4 Members Of Spiritual Group

Sending a harsh message to followers of the Falun Gong spiritual
movement , Chinese authorities gave prison sentences ranging from 7
to 18 years to three men and a woman who were said to be top
organizers . Last summer the government declared the group an `` evil
cult '' after 10,000 members mounted an illegal demonstration in
Beijing .

Two of the sentences _ 18 years for one defendant and 16 years
for another _ were stiffer than those meted out to democracy
advocates in the last several years , a sign of how frightened the
government is of a movement that has attracted millions of
citizens .

_ ERIK ECKHOLM

Challengers Pull in Funds

Sen. John McCain and former Sen. Bill Bradley , the surging
presidential challengers , reported surprisingly strong fund-raising
totals for the final three months of the year , matching their
climbing poll ratings in New Hampshire .

McCain took in $ 6.1 million and Bradley received $ 8 million ,
compared to only $ 4 million for Vice President Al Gore . Texas Gov.
George Bush continued his dominance of the money chase , collecting
$ 10 million in the fourth quarter of 1999 and entering the 2000
primary season with $ 31.4 million in the bank .

_ JOHN M. BRODER

Inquiry Into Kohl Funds

Prosecutors have started a criminal investigation into secret
bank accounts used by former German Chancellor Helmut Kohl to
collect and distribute at least $ 1 million in allegedly illegal
political contributions during the past decade .

The investigation marks a low point for Kohl , who was chancellor
from 1982 until 1998 and who engineered the reunification of
Germany . If found guilty of embezzlement or fraud , Kohl could
theoretically face a prison term of up to five years .

_ EDMUND L. ANDREWS

Violence Visits a Beatle

Anyone who was once a Beatle , even the `` quiet '' one , can never
fade away and live a simple life _ no matter how big the mansion ,
how high the walls . George Harrison learned that in a spasm of
violence , one with echoes of John Lennon 's murder nearly two
decades ago .

An intruder _ obsessed with the Beatles to the point of
believing they were witches _ broke into Harrison 's home outside
London and stabbed him in the chest , also slightly injuring his
wife , Olivia . Harrison should recover from the resulting lung
injury , his surgeon said , in a matter of weeks .

_ HUBERT B. HERRING

-LRB- MORE -RRB-

nn

UNDATED : B. HERRING

Huge Storm Damage in France

Back-to-back storms with gale force winds that reached 120 miles
per hour ripped through France and other parts of Europe . The
French Ministry of Culture and Communication said it would take
more than $ 60 million just to repair damage to historic monuments
like Notre Dame Cathedral , Ste.-Chapelle and the palace at
Versailles .

The storms tore off roofs , toppled thousands of trees and caused
flooding and avalanches that killed at least 130 people throughout
Europe , 78 of them in France . More than a quarter of Frances
electric grid was damaged . One insurance company said the cost of
repairing damages from the storms would reach $ 5 billion .

_ SUZANNE DALEY

A Coup in Ivory Coast

Ever since it achieved independence from France in 1960 , Ivory
Coast has been considered a model of stability and prosperity in
Africa . So it came as a shock , both in Africa and in France , when
soldiers mutinying over low pay went on a looting spree and , one
day later , a military junta announced a coup , the first in the
country 's history .

The leader of the nonviolent coup , Gen. Robert Guei , a former
armed forces chief ousted by President Henri Konan Bedie , said he
took action largely because Bedie was creating ethnic divisions .

_ DONALD G. McNEIL Jr. .

Big Recall of Luxury Foods

In what may be the first Internet recall of contaminated food ,
D'Artagnan , the Newark , N.J. , company known nationwide for its high
quality foods , went beyond notifying the usual retailers and
distributors of its voluntary recall of all of the pates , mousses
and terrines made at a Huntington , N.Y. , plant .

The company called every customer who had ordered the products
over the Internet and through its catalog _ a total of 3,576 calls .

The products were recalled because a few of the company 's
truffled mousses and peppercorn mousses were found to be
contaminated with listeria , a potentially deadly bacterium .

_ MARIAN BURROS

Bail Is Denied For Los Alamos Scientist

On the surface , the hearings in the case of Dr. Wen Ho Lee , the
scientist accused of mishandling sensitive nuclear secrets at the
Los Alamos National Laboratory , were simple . Lee sought to be
released on bail .

He was refused bail a second time , but not before the hearing
was turned into a mini-trial of both Lee and the security at
government weapons labs .

Prosecutors called Lee devious in his efforts to bypass security
precautions .

The defense , however , showed that Lee had downloaded the secret
data easily onto computer tapes , had left evidence in the open and
had even called the lab to ask how to delete some files . The last
was an act that prosecutors called especially nefarious .

_ JAMES STERNGOLD

Giuliani Sees Welfare Victory

New York City Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has declared victory in his
war on welfare . The mayor , a likely Senate candidate , said he had
met the deadline he set 18 months ago to end welfare by
`` engaging '' all available adult recipients in work or
work-preparation in exchange for aid .

But critics loudly disputed his figures , noting for example that
recipients counted as successes included thousands merely referred
for evaluation for work .

_ NINA BERNSTEIN

UNDATED : B. HERRING

Huge Storm Damage in France

Back-to-back storms with gale force winds that reached 120 miles
per hour ripped through France and other parts of Europe . The
French Ministry of Culture and Communication said it would take
more than $ 60 million just to repair damage to historic monuments
like Notre Dame Cathedral , Ste.-Chapelle and the palace at
Versailles .

The storms tore off roofs , toppled thousands of trees and caused
flooding and avalanches that killed at least 130 people throughout
Europe , 78 of them in France . More than a quarter of Frances
electric grid was damaged . One insurance company said the cost of
repairing damages from the storms would reach $ 5 billion .

_ SUZANNE DALEY

A Coup in Ivory Coast

Ever since it achieved independence from France in 1960 , Ivory
Coast has been considered a model of stability and prosperity in
Africa . So it came as a shock , both in Africa and in France , when
soldiers mutinying over low pay went on a looting spree and , one
day later , a military junta announced a coup , the first in the
country 's history .

The leader of the nonviolent coup , Gen. Robert Guei , a former
armed forces chief ousted by President Henri Konan Bedie , said he
took action largely because Bedie was creating ethnic divisions .

_ DONALD G. McNEIL Jr. .

Big Recall of Luxury Foods

In what may be the first Internet recall of contaminated food ,
D'Artagnan , the Newark , N.J. , company known nationwide for its high
quality foods , went beyond notifying the usual retailers and
distributors of its voluntary recall of all of the pates , mousses
and terrines made at a Huntington , N.Y. , plant .

The company called every customer who had ordered the products
over the Internet and through its catalog _ a total of 3,576 calls .

The products were recalled because a few of the company 's
truffled mousses and peppercorn mousses were found to be
contaminated with listeria , a potentially deadly bacterium .

_ MARIAN BURROS

Bail Is Denied For Los Alamos Scientist

On the surface , the hearings in the case of Dr. Wen Ho Lee , the
scientist accused of mishandling sensitive nuclear secrets at the
Los Alamos National Laboratory , were simple . Lee sought to be
released on bail .

He was refused bail a second time , but not before the hearing
was turned into a mini-trial of both Lee and the security at
government weapons labs .

Prosecutors called Lee devious in his efforts to bypass security
precautions .

The defense , however , showed that Lee had downloaded the secret
data easily onto computer tapes , had left evidence in the open and
had even called the lab to ask how to delete some files . The last
was an act that prosecutors called especially nefarious .

_ JAMES STERNGOLD

Giuliani Sees Welfare Victory

New York City Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has declared victory in his
war on welfare . The mayor , a likely Senate candidate , said he had
met the deadline he set 18 months ago to end welfare by
`` engaging '' all available adult recipients in work or
work-preparation in exchange for aid .

But critics loudly disputed his figures , noting for example that
recipients counted as successes included thousands merely referred
for evaluation for work .

_ NINA BERNSTEIN

PLAIN-LANGUAGE MOVEMENT HACKS THROUGH THICKETS OF CORPORATESPEAK

A cottage industry of plain-language consultants has sprung up
in recent years . They aim to wage war on the business buzzwords ,
governmental verbosity and turgid legalese that make many public
documents impossible to understand .

These experts also seek to instill some of the basics of good
writing , like the importance of short , direct sentences . Much of
their work has come in the mutual fund industry , which for the past
two years has been under an order by the Securities and Exchange
Commission to simplify documents .

Samples of the consultants ' work follow .

_ DAVID LEONHARDT

_ Getting off to a good start is crucial . A convoluted
beginning , particularly when the subject matter is complicated , can
turn off readers in a hurry . Look at the difference between a 1998
mutual fund brochure from American Century Investments and one it
sent last year .

Before : All of the funds offered in this Prospectus seek capital
growth by investing in securities , primarily common stocks , that
meet certain fundamental and technical standards of selection
-LRB- relating primarily to earnings and revenue acceleration -RRB- and have ,
in the opinion of the funds manager , better-than-average potential
for appreciation .

After : The fund managers look for stocks of companies that they
believe will increase in value over time , using a growth investment
strategy developed by American Century .

_ The SEC urges companies to use personal pronouns and simple
language . The Commission offered the following example in a 1998
plain-English handbook it sent to mutual fund companies .

Before : This Summary does not purport to be complete and is
qualified in its entirety by the more detailed information
contained in the Proxy Statement and the Appendices hereto , all of
which should be carefully reviewed .

After : Because this is a summary , it does not contain all the
information that may be important to you . You should read the
entire proxy statement and its appendices carefully before you
decide how to vote .

_ Plain-language doctors like those at the New York consulting
firm Siegel & Gale often start by making passive verbs active and
stamping out bureaucratese .

Before : Deposits may be made by a minor and withdrawals thereof
may be made by the minor without the consent of a parent of
guardian , neither of whom , in that capacity , shall have any right
to attach or interfere in any manner with such deposits or
withdrawals .

After : Minors may make deposits and withdrawals from their
accounts without the consent or interference of a parent or
guardian .

_ William M. Lutz , an English professor at Rutgers University
and a leading plain-language advocate , offers this example of how
to make a document easier to read .

Before : Marketing is a creative , analytic and integrative
effort . We need to work hand-in-hand with the field to get their
perspective and to draw on their experiences . And there are plenty
of ideas around the rest of the company , too . Marketing will draw
on your cumulative ideas and experiences and integrate them with
other business parts into a synergistic whole , which is bigger than
the sum of its parts .

After : To do marketing well , we 'll have to draw on the ideas and
experiences from the field and other departments , determine how
these might help us , then integrate them into our marketing plans
and practices in a way that increases their effectiveness .

_ Sounds easy , right ? But simplifying a document often requires
a whole new approach , not just slicing and dicing . Contrast the
first sentence of a letter that Texaco 's chief executive , Peter I.
Bijur , wrote to shareholders in 1996 and the start to his letter in
1998 , when the company began using simpler language :

Before : With this , my first report to you as Chairman and Chief
Executive Officer of Texaco , I am privileged to review along with
Vice Chairman Allen Krowe our strong 1996 performance , highlight
our greater ambitions and plan for 1997 and beyond , and discuss our
philosophy for sustaining long-term growth for our company .

After : 1998 was the toughest time we have faced in my 33 years
with the company .

-LRB- MORE -RRB-

nn

PLAIN-LANGUAGE MOVEMENT HACKS THROUGH THICKETS OF CORPORATESPEAK

A cottage industry of plain-language consultants has sprung up
in recent years . They aim to wage war on the business buzzwords ,
governmental verbosity and turgid legalese that make many public
documents impossible to understand .

These experts also seek to instill some of the basics of good
writing , like the importance of short , direct sentences . Much of
their work has come in the mutual fund industry , which for the past
two years has been under an order by the Securities and Exchange
Commission to simplify documents .

Samples of the consultants ' work follow .

_ DAVID LEONHARDT

_ Getting off to a good start is crucial . A convoluted
beginning , particularly when the subject matter is complicated , can
turn off readers in a hurry . Look at the difference between a 1998
mutual fund brochure from American Century Investments and one it
sent last year .

Before : All of the funds offered in this Prospectus seek capital
growth by investing in securities , primarily common stocks , that
meet certain fundamental and technical standards of selection
-LRB- relating primarily to earnings and revenue acceleration -RRB- and have ,
in the opinion of the funds manager , better-than-average potential
for appreciation .

After : The fund managers look for stocks of companies that they
believe will increase in value over time , using a growth investment
strategy developed by American Century .

_ The SEC urges companies to use personal pronouns and simple
language . The Commission offered the following example in a 1998
plain-English handbook it sent to mutual fund companies .

Before : This Summary does not purport to be complete and is
qualified in its entirety by the more detailed information
contained in the Proxy Statement and the Appendices hereto , all of
which should be carefully reviewed .

After : Because this is a summary , it does not contain all the
information that may be important to you . You should read the
entire proxy statement and its appendices carefully before you
decide how to vote .

_ Plain-language doctors like those at the New York consulting
firm Siegel & Gale often start by making passive verbs active and
stamping out bureaucratese .

Before : Deposits may be made by a minor and withdrawals thereof
may be made by the minor without the consent of a parent of
guardian , neither of whom , in that capacity , shall have any right
to attach or interfere in any manner with such deposits or
withdrawals .

After : Minors may make deposits and withdrawals from their
accounts without the consent or interference of a parent or
guardian .

_ William M. Lutz , an English professor at Rutgers University
and a leading plain-language advocate , offers this example of how
to make a document easier to read .

Before : Marketing is a creative , analytic and integrative
effort . We need to work hand-in-hand with the field to get their
perspective and to draw on their experiences . And there are plenty
of ideas around the rest of the company , too . Marketing will draw
on your cumulative ideas and experiences and integrate them with
other business parts into a synergistic whole , which is bigger than
the sum of its parts .

After : To do marketing well , we 'll have to draw on the ideas and
experiences from the field and other departments , determine how
these might help us , then integrate them into our marketing plans
and practices in a way that increases their effectiveness .

_ Sounds easy , right ? But simplifying a document often requires
a whole new approach , not just slicing and dicing . Contrast the
first sentence of a letter that Texaco 's chief executive , Peter I.
Bijur , wrote to shareholders in 1996 and the start to his letter in
1998 , when the company began using simpler language :

Before : With this , my first report to you as Chairman and Chief
Executive Officer of Texaco , I am privileged to review along with
Vice Chairman Allen Krowe our strong 1996 performance , highlight
our greater ambitions and plan for 1997 and beyond , and discuss our
philosophy for sustaining long-term growth for our company .

After : 1998 was the toughest time we have faced in my 33 years
with the company .

-LRB- MORE -RRB-

nn

UNDATED : the company .

At times more words , not fewer , are needed to decode
particularly turgid passages . Here 's one example cited by Lutz ,
with a suggested revision .

Before : When business processes are automated , employees are
careful not to fall into the trap of applying new technology to
old , inefficient work procedures . Instead , a needs assessment is
completed to identify system requirements , and then automated
systems are designed to accomplish these goals .

After : Computers do n't improve the way you do business , if you
simply do business the same old way using the computers . So , before
we installed a new computer system in the Purchasing Department , we
asked ourselves if there were a better way to do what this
department does . After talking to the people in Purchasing and to
our suppliers , we came up with a completely new way to run this
department . Then we asked the computer people to design the
computer systems we needed to make our new approach work .

_ And then there are the hopeless causes that force even the
most fervent plain-language disciples to throw up their hands .
Consider this financial document , provided by Lutz , which comes in
at a breathtaking 374 words . He said he still has n't come up with a
revision :

A conveyance by the Transferor to a Trust of Receivables in
Additional Accounts or Participations is subject to the following
conditions , among others -LRB- provided , that the following conditions
-LRB- other than the delivery of a written assignment and computer file
or microfiche list as described in clause -LRB- ii -RRB- and the making of
representations and warranties in clause -LRB- iii -RRB- shall not apply to
the transfer to a Trust of Receivables in Automatic Additional
Accounts -RRB- : -LRB- i -RRB- the Transferor shall give the related Trustee , each
Rating Agency and the Servicer written notice that such additional
Accounts or Participations will be included , which notice shall
specify the approximate aggregate amount of the Receivables or
interests therein to be transferred ; -LRB- ii -RRB- the Transferor shall have
delivered to such Trustee a written assignment -LRB- including an
acceptance by such Trustee on behalf of the related Trust for the
benefit of the Certificateholders -RRB- as provided in the related
Agreement relating to such Additional Accounts or Participations
-LRB- the ` Assignment ' -RRB- and , the Transferor shall have delivered to such
Trustee a computer file or microfiche list , dated the date of such
Assignment , containing a true and complete list of such Additional
Account or Participations ; -LRB- iii -RRB- the Transferor shall represent and
warrant that -LRB- x -RRB- each Additional Account is , as of the Addition
Date , an Eligible Account , and each Receivable in such Additional
Account is , as of the Addition Date , an Eligible Receivable , -LRB- y -RRB- no
selection procedures believed by the Transferor to be materially
adverse to the interests of the related Certificateholders were
utilized in selecting the Additional Accounts from the available
Eligible Accounts from the Identified Pool , and -LRB- z -RRB- as of the
Addition Date , the Transferor is not insolvent ; -LRB- iv -RRB- the Transferor
shall deliver certain opinions of counsel with respect to the
transfer of the Receivables in the Additional Accounts or the
Participations to such Trust and -LRB- v -RRB- under certain circumstances
with respect to Additional Accounts , and in all cases with respect
to Participations , the Transferor shall have received notice from
each Rating Agency then rating any Series of Certificates
outstanding under such Trust that the addition of such Additional
Accounts or Participations will not result in the reduction or
withdrawal of its then existing rating of any Series of
Certificates outstanding under such Trust . -RRB-

UNDATED : the company .

At times more words , not fewer , are needed to decode
particularly turgid passages . Here 's one example cited by Lutz ,
with a suggested revision .

Before : When business processes are automated , employees are
careful not to fall into the trap of applying new technology to
old , inefficient work procedures . Instead , a needs assessment is
completed to identify system requirements , and then automated
systems are designed to accomplish these goals .

After : Computers do n't improve the way you do business , if you
simply do business the same old way using the computers . So , before
we installed a new computer system in the Purchasing Department , we
asked ourselves if there were a better way to do what this
department does . After talking to the people in Purchasing and to
our suppliers , we came up with a completely new way to run this
department . Then we asked the computer people to design the
computer systems we needed to make our new approach work .

_ And then there are the hopeless causes that force even the
most fervent plain-language disciples to throw up their hands .
Consider this financial document , provided by Lutz , which comes in
at a breathtaking 374 words . He said he still has n't come up with a
revision :

A conveyance by the Transferor to a Trust of Receivables in
Additional Accounts or Participations is subject to the following
conditions , among others -LRB- provided , that the following conditions
-LRB- other than the delivery of a written assignment and computer file
or microfiche list as described in clause -LRB- ii -RRB- and the making of
representations and warranties in clause -LRB- iii -RRB- shall not apply to
the transfer to a Trust of Receivables in Automatic Additional
Accounts -RRB- : -LRB- i -RRB- the Transferor shall give the related Trustee , each
Rating Agency and the Servicer written notice that such additional
Accounts or Participations will be included , which notice shall
specify the approximate aggregate amount of the Receivables or
interests therein to be transferred ; -LRB- ii -RRB- the Transferor shall have
delivered to such Trustee a written assignment -LRB- including an
acceptance by such Trustee on behalf of the related Trust for the
benefit of the Certificateholders -RRB- as provided in the related
Agreement relating to such Additional Accounts or Participations
-LRB- the ` Assignment ' -RRB- and , the Transferor shall have delivered to such
Trustee a computer file or microfiche list , dated the date of such
Assignment , containing a true and complete list of such Additional
Account or Participations ; -LRB- iii -RRB- the Transferor shall represent and
warrant that -LRB- x -RRB- each Additional Account is , as of the Addition
Date , an Eligible Account , and each Receivable in such Additional
Account is , as of the Addition Date , an Eligible Receivable , -LRB- y -RRB- no
selection procedures believed by the Transferor to be materially
adverse to the interests of the related Certificateholders were
utilized in selecting the Additional Accounts from the available
Eligible Accounts from the Identified Pool , and -LRB- z -RRB- as of the
Addition Date , the Transferor is not insolvent ; -LRB- iv -RRB- the Transferor
shall deliver certain opinions of counsel with respect to the
transfer of the Receivables in the Additional Accounts or the
Participations to such Trust and -LRB- v -RRB- under certain circumstances
with respect to Additional Accounts , and in all cases with respect
to Participations , the Transferor shall have received notice from
each Rating Agency then rating any Series of Certificates
outstanding under such Trust that the addition of such Additional
Accounts or Participations will not result in the reduction or
withdrawal of its then existing rating of any Series of
Certificates outstanding under such Trust . -RRB-

RECONSIDERING CANNIBALISM : IF YOU ARE WHAT YOU EAT ...

Do you eat human flesh ?

No , it is not a very polite question . But perhaps the horror it
arouses reflects a guilty desire , some dark instinct buried in the
atavistic limbo of the mind , to crush one 's enemy , savor his flesh
and absorb his qualities .

Cannibalism has been in the news as rival experts try to get
this bizarre but revealing topic into focus . The issue is whether
cannibalism was once a routine part of human social behavior or is
merely a myth designed to justify advanced nations ' domination over
primitive and allegedly anthropophagous peoples .

Of course the survivors of desperate expeditions will sometimes
resort to eating their companions if no other food is available .
The companions , one hopes , died of natural causes , though this
can not always be assumed . `` Oh , I am a cook and a captain bold , And
the mate of the Nancy brig , And a bo ` sun tight , and a midshipmite ,
And the crew of the captain 's gig , '' the sole survivor laments of
his consumed shipmates in W.S. Gilbert 's `` Yarn of the Nancy
Bell . ''

This consumption in extremis is known as survival cannibalism , a
practice that is not in doubt . The debate concerns the practice of
ritual cannibalism , like the headhunting of enemies , the Aztecs '
sacrifice of war captives or the eating of dead relatives as part
of beliefs about recycling and regeneration .

Human myth and folklore are shot through with man-eating ogres
and cyclopes . The central sacrament of Christianity is the symbolic
eating of transubstantiated flesh and blood . It is hard not to
suspect a lot of anthropophagy in the closet of the human past . But
the modern reporting of cannibalism has been beset by a bout of
extreme revisionism .

In a 1979 book , `` The Man-Eating Myth : Anthropology and
Anthropophagy , '' Dr. William Arens of the State University of New
York at Stony Brook dismissed as circumstantial and unconvincing
all reports of ritual cannibalism . Arens even challenged the widely
accepted finding that kuru , a human form of mad cow disease seen
among the Fore people of Papua New Guinea , was spread by the eating
of human brains .

Arens ' position has influenced anthropologists who believe
primitive peoples were often maligned by missionaries and others
intent upon their moral improvement . `` There is no reliable
evidence to support the claim that Australian Aboriginal societies
engaged in institutionalized cannibalism , '' writes Michael
Pickering , of the Museum of Victoria in Australia , in `` The
Anthropology of Cannibalism '' -LRB- Bergin & Garvey , 1999 -RRB- .

This tide of skepticism doubtless washed away many fanciful
accounts but has been dismaying for archaeologists who found their
evidence for cannibal feasts summarily dismissed . Cracked and
burned human bones have been turned up for decades in Anasazi ruins
in the American Southwest . Despite suggestions first made a century
ago that these might represent cannibalism or ritual sacrifice , the
remains were delicately referred to as `` mass burials . ''

The leading advocate of Anasazi cannibalism is Dr. Christy
Turner of Arizona State University . He met only disbelief when he
proposed in 1970 that the cut , burned and defleshed bones of 30
American Indians in Polacca Wash in Arizona were the remains of an
ancient cannibal repast . `` In the 1960s , the new paradigm about
Indians was that they were all peaceful and happy . So , to find
something like this was the antithesis of the new way we were
supposed to be thinking about Indians , '' Turner told Science
magazine in 1997 .

Critics attributed the cuts on the grisly remains like these to
animal scavengers , funerary practices , the roof falling in _
anything but anthropophagy . After 30 years of work and the study of
15,000 skeletons , Turner is now convinced that cannibalism was
practiced by the Anasazi as a method of social control . The
cannibals ' base of operations seems to have been the great house in
Chaco Canyon , N.M. , from which they terrorized people within a
100-mile radius between 900 and 1700 AD .

Turner 's findings have been supported by a paleoanthropologist ,
Dr. Tim White of the University of California at Berkeley , who from
human bones at an Anasazi site dated to 1150 A.D. noted the macabre
phenomenon of `` pot polish . '' The tips of the bones had shiny
patches , as if rubbed smooth against the walls of a cooking pot .
White showed that deer bones cooked in an Anasazi pot acquired the
same polish marks .

Cannibalism is sometimes said to be a phenomenon of the
agricultural revolution of 10,000 years ago , after which human
populations first became quite numerous . But a clear case of
cannibalism was reported last October among Neanderthals who lived
100,000 years ago by the Rhone river in southern France .

From a cave , French archaeologists recovered 78 pieces of bone
that seemed to belong to about six people . Cuts on the skulls show
the chewing muscles were stripped off and , in one case , the tongue
cut out . The leg bones were broken to remove the marrow . As no
other human species inhabited Europe at the time , this is the
strongest evidence that the Neanderthals , close human relatives who
became extinct 30,000 years ago , practiced cannibalism .

Even now , this horrid propensity for human flesh lies not so
deep beneath the surface . After World War II , a Japanese nurse was
found guilty of having participated in eating the liver of a U.S.
airman executed at Kyushu University , writes historian John Dower
in his new book `` Embracing Defeat . '' Emperor Jean-Bedel Bokassa I
of the Central African Republic possessed an oversized refrigerator
and oven , which his accusers said were used for the culinary
preparation of his countrymen . And Americans have Jeffrey Dahmer .

Even in Western Europe , that cradle of civilization , consider
the strange use of food names for former adversaries . The French ,
for example , call the English les bifteks -LRB- beefsteaks -RRB- , while the
English sometimes refer to the French as frogs -LRB- for frog legs -RRB- and
the Germans as krauts -LRB- cabbage -RRB- . These jocular epithets are
doubtless anthropophagous echoes of a forbidden taste from our
Paleolithic heritage .

Do you eat human flesh ? Of course not . But not so long ago , your
ancestors did .

RECONSIDERING CANNIBALISM : IF YOU ARE WHAT YOU EAT ...

Do you eat human flesh ?

No , it is not a very polite question . But perhaps the horror it
arouses reflects a guilty desire , some dark instinct buried in the
atavistic limbo of the mind , to crush one 's enemy , savor his flesh
and absorb his qualities .

Cannibalism has been in the news as rival experts try to get
this bizarre but revealing topic into focus . The issue is whether
cannibalism was once a routine part of human social behavior or is
merely a myth designed to justify advanced nations ' domination over
primitive and allegedly anthropophagous peoples .

Of course the survivors of desperate expeditions will sometimes
resort to eating their companions if no other food is available .
The companions , one hopes , died of natural causes , though this
can not always be assumed . `` Oh , I am a cook and a captain bold , And
the mate of the Nancy brig , And a bo ` sun tight , and a midshipmite ,
And the crew of the captain 's gig , '' the sole survivor laments of
his consumed shipmates in W.S. Gilbert 's `` Yarn of the Nancy
Bell . ''

This consumption in extremis is known as survival cannibalism , a
practice that is not in doubt . The debate concerns the practice of
ritual cannibalism , like the headhunting of enemies , the Aztecs '
sacrifice of war captives or the eating of dead relatives as part
of beliefs about recycling and regeneration .

Human myth and folklore are shot through with man-eating ogres
and cyclopes . The central sacrament of Christianity is the symbolic
eating of transubstantiated flesh and blood . It is hard not to
suspect a lot of anthropophagy in the closet of the human past . But
the modern reporting of cannibalism has been beset by a bout of
extreme revisionism .

In a 1979 book , `` The Man-Eating Myth : Anthropology and
Anthropophagy , '' Dr. William Arens of the State University of New
York at Stony Brook dismissed as circumstantial and unconvincing
all reports of ritual cannibalism . Arens even challenged the widely
accepted finding that kuru , a human form of mad cow disease seen
among the Fore people of Papua New Guinea , was spread by the eating
of human brains .

Arens ' position has influenced anthropologists who believe
primitive peoples were often maligned by missionaries and others
intent upon their moral improvement . `` There is no reliable
evidence to support the claim that Australian Aboriginal societies
engaged in institutionalized cannibalism , '' writes Michael
Pickering , of the Museum of Victoria in Australia , in `` The
Anthropology of Cannibalism '' -LRB- Bergin & Garvey , 1999 -RRB- .

This tide of skepticism doubtless washed away many fanciful
accounts but has been dismaying for archaeologists who found their
evidence for cannibal feasts summarily dismissed . Cracked and
burned human bones have been turned up for decades in Anasazi ruins
in the American Southwest . Despite suggestions first made a century
ago that these might represent cannibalism or ritual sacrifice , the
remains were delicately referred to as `` mass burials . ''

The leading advocate of Anasazi cannibalism is Dr. Christy
Turner of Arizona State University . He met only disbelief when he
proposed in 1970 that the cut , burned and defleshed bones of 30
American Indians in Polacca Wash in Arizona were the remains of an
ancient cannibal repast . `` In the 1960s , the new paradigm about
Indians was that they were all peaceful and happy . So , to find
something like this was the antithesis of the new way we were
supposed to be thinking about Indians , '' Turner told Science
magazine in 1997 .

Critics attributed the cuts on the grisly remains like these to
animal scavengers , funerary practices , the roof falling in _
anything but anthropophagy . After 30 years of work and the study of
15,000 skeletons , Turner is now convinced that cannibalism was
practiced by the Anasazi as a method of social control . The
cannibals ' base of operations seems to have been the great house in
Chaco Canyon , N.M. , from which they terrorized people within a
100-mile radius between 900 and 1700 AD .

Turner 's findings have been supported by a paleoanthropologist ,
Dr. Tim White of the University of California at Berkeley , who from
human bones at an Anasazi site dated to 1150 A.D. noted the macabre
phenomenon of `` pot polish . '' The tips of the bones had shiny
patches , as if rubbed smooth against the walls of a cooking pot .
White showed that deer bones cooked in an Anasazi pot acquired the
same polish marks .

Cannibalism is sometimes said to be a phenomenon of the
agricultural revolution of 10,000 years ago , after which human
populations first became quite numerous . But a clear case of
cannibalism was reported last October among Neanderthals who lived
100,000 years ago by the Rhone river in southern France .

From a cave , French archaeologists recovered 78 pieces of bone
that seemed to belong to about six people . Cuts on the skulls show
the chewing muscles were stripped off and , in one case , the tongue
cut out . The leg bones were broken to remove the marrow . As no
other human species inhabited Europe at the time , this is the
strongest evidence that the Neanderthals , close human relatives who
became extinct 30,000 years ago , practiced cannibalism .

Even now , this horrid propensity for human flesh lies not so
deep beneath the surface . After World War II , a Japanese nurse was
found guilty of having participated in eating the liver of a U.S.
airman executed at Kyushu University , writes historian John Dower
in his new book `` Embracing Defeat . '' Emperor Jean-Bedel Bokassa I
of the Central African Republic possessed an oversized refrigerator
and oven , which his accusers said were used for the culinary
preparation of his countrymen . And Americans have Jeffrey Dahmer .

Even in Western Europe , that cradle of civilization , consider
the strange use of food names for former adversaries . The French ,
for example , call the English les bifteks -LRB- beefsteaks -RRB- , while the
English sometimes refer to the French as frogs -LRB- for frog legs -RRB- and
the Germans as krauts -LRB- cabbage -RRB- . These jocular epithets are
doubtless anthropophagous echoes of a forbidden taste from our
Paleolithic heritage .

Do you eat human flesh ? Of course not . But not so long ago , your
ancestors did .

EUROPE STARES AT A FUTURE BUILT BY IMMIGRANTS

Europeans , it often seems , spent the last
decade building resentments of American fast food , pop culture ,
corporate callousness and an unchallenged military machine _ when
they were n't importing or trying to emulate them . They ended the
century thinking they had staked out the parameters of
Americanization and could now concentrate on erecting barricades
around their traditional larders , languages and societies . But some
demographers have a big surprise in store .

Before the new millennium is a few decades old , these
demographers say , Europe will be face to face with an
American-style phenomenon more profoundly unsettling to many of
them than any superficial cultural symbol or business intrusion .

The challenge , these experts say , is this : To survive
economically and socially , Europe may have to lower its bars to
immigration and change its racial and ethnic face through mass
migration of labor from around the world . In other words , it may
find itself debating moves toward a social structure that looks
more like America .

It has often been said that however much they share in
democratic values , Europeans and Americans still differ on one
fundamental : In America , the whole idea of citizenship is that
anyone from anywhere can become naturalized . In Europe , on the
other hand , the idea of citizenship in most places is still linked
to ethnic heritage , or at least to language and culture . True ,
Americans have restricted immigration and Europeans have invited
foreign workers to take jobs in their economies . But large-scale
immigration and naturalization is still an American ideal , while
Europeans cling to a linguistic and racial basis for citizenship .

In the coming decades , U.N. experts say , demographics indicate
that many European countries -LRB- and Japan -RRB- will have more older
people and fewer babies than ever before . This seems to foretell
severely shrunken labor forces and swollen ranks of pensioners . If
Europeans want to keep their economies and social services running ,
they will be tempted to look far afield for qualified workers of
all kinds _ not just the semi-skilled or unskilled workers who have
traditionally been invited to fill gaps in their work forces .

Joseph Chamie , the director of the U.N. population division ,
says there is a logical response : what he calls replacement
migration . `` These countries in Europe will face the wall , '' he
said . `` They either bring in migrants , or they are going to decline
in size . The model that the United States has _ and Canada and
Australia _ is increasingly becoming attractive to some of the
thinkers in those countries . ''

U.N. experts now preparing a report to be published this year
say that their early projections show that Italy would have to add
about 9 million immigrants by 2025 _ about 300,000 a year _ to keep
its population at 1995 levels , Germany would need to import 14
million people _ 500,000 a year _ France 2 million and the European
Union as a whole about 35 million . If the Europeans wanted to keep
their ratio of older people to active workers at the 1995 levels ,
the union would need 135 million immigrants by 2025 .

Surplus labor , some of it very highly skilled , is waiting in the
third world , and the pressure for migration out of overpopulated
countries will be growing as the European societies shrink . A group
of developing countries is calling for a U.N. conference that would
have the freer movement of labor on its agenda . India , for example ,
has a labor force larger than that of the European Union . A lot of
its computer geniuses are already sought by Silicon Valley . Will
Europe soon have to compete for them ? And will it let them migrate ?

If migration is the answer , and the numbers are large enough ,
Europe may well find itself under a challenge to make these and
other immigrants full citizens in every sense . Today , Germany
tolerates Turkish `` guest workers , '' as France allows Algerian
migrants , but in both cases these minorities have become lightning
rods for nationalist resentments .

As always when projections are made , there are dissenting
voices . Michael Teitelbaum , program director of the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation in New York and the co-author with Jay Winter of `` A
Question of Numbers : High Migration , Low Fertility and the Politics
of National Identity '' -LRB- Hill and Wang , 1998 -RRB- , points out that some
European countries are already quite culturally and racially
diverse . That aside , he says , he does not believe that large-scale
migration is unavoidable .

`` I do n't think there is anything inevitable about anything when
it comes to demography , and I am a demographer , '' he said . And , he
said , European nations may not see the American example as worth
emulating .

`` It depends on what your goals are , '' he said . `` If your goals
are to maximize your gross domestic product then you probably do n't
want a labor force that is slowly declining in numbers , even if
their productivity is rising fast . If your goal is not GDP but GDP
per capita or the equitable distribution of GDP and a kind of
equilibrium , a kind of agreeable quality of life in your society ,
then you may not care as much . ''

Teitelbaum is saying , in effect , that the challenge may be what
Chamie predicts , but that Europeans may decide the cost of meeting
it is too high . He points to European feelings about American-style
capitalism .

`` There are many Europeans who hear Americans say how triumphant
the American economy is and how wonderful and prosperous it is and
they look at it and say , ` Gee , we do n't want to be like that , '' '
Teitelbaum said . `` ` It 's really two societies with the kind of
underclass that 's getting worse and worse off , more and more
marginalized . '' '

-LRB- MORE -RRB-

nn

EUROPE STARES AT A FUTURE BUILT BY IMMIGRANTS

Europeans , it often seems , spent the last
decade building resentments of American fast food , pop culture ,
corporate callousness and an unchallenged military machine _ when
they were n't importing or trying to emulate them . They ended the
century thinking they had staked out the parameters of
Americanization and could now concentrate on erecting barricades
around their traditional larders , languages and societies . But some
demographers have a big surprise in store .

Before the new millennium is a few decades old , these
demographers say , Europe will be face to face with an
American-style phenomenon more profoundly unsettling to many of
them than any superficial cultural symbol or business intrusion .

The challenge , these experts say , is this : To survive
economically and socially , Europe may have to lower its bars to
immigration and change its racial and ethnic face through mass
migration of labor from around the world . In other words , it may
find itself debating moves toward a social structure that looks
more like America .

It has often been said that however much they share in
democratic values , Europeans and Americans still differ on one
fundamental : In America , the whole idea of citizenship is that
anyone from anywhere can become naturalized . In Europe , on the
other hand , the idea of citizenship in most places is still linked
to ethnic heritage , or at least to language and culture . True ,
Americans have restricted immigration and Europeans have invited
foreign workers to take jobs in their economies . But large-scale
immigration and naturalization is still an American ideal , while
Europeans cling to a linguistic and racial basis for citizenship .

In the coming decades , U.N. experts say , demographics indicate
that many European countries -LRB- and Japan -RRB- will have more older
people and fewer babies than ever before . This seems to foretell
severely shrunken labor forces and swollen ranks of pensioners . If
Europeans want to keep their economies and social services running ,
they will be tempted to look far afield for qualified workers of
all kinds _ not just the semi-skilled or unskilled workers who have
traditionally been invited to fill gaps in their work forces .

Joseph Chamie , the director of the U.N. population division ,
says there is a logical response : what he calls replacement
migration . `` These countries in Europe will face the wall , '' he
said . `` They either bring in migrants , or they are going to decline
in size . The model that the United States has _ and Canada and
Australia _ is increasingly becoming attractive to some of the
thinkers in those countries . ''

U.N. experts now preparing a report to be published this year
say that their early projections show that Italy would have to add
about 9 million immigrants by 2025 _ about 300,000 a year _ to keep
its population at 1995 levels , Germany would need to import 14
million people _ 500,000 a year _ France 2 million and the European
Union as a whole about 35 million . If the Europeans wanted to keep
their ratio of older people to active workers at the 1995 levels ,
the union would need 135 million immigrants by 2025 .

Surplus labor , some of it very highly skilled , is waiting in the
third world , and the pressure for migration out of overpopulated
countries will be growing as the European societies shrink . A group
of developing countries is calling for a U.N. conference that would
have the freer movement of labor on its agenda . India , for example ,
has a labor force larger than that of the European Union . A lot of
its computer geniuses are already sought by Silicon Valley . Will
Europe soon have to compete for them ? And will it let them migrate ?

If migration is the answer , and the numbers are large enough ,
Europe may well find itself under a challenge to make these and
other immigrants full citizens in every sense . Today , Germany
tolerates Turkish `` guest workers , '' as France allows Algerian
migrants , but in both cases these minorities have become lightning
rods for nationalist resentments .

As always when projections are made , there are dissenting
voices . Michael Teitelbaum , program director of the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation in New York and the co-author with Jay Winter of `` A
Question of Numbers : High Migration , Low Fertility and the Politics
of National Identity '' -LRB- Hill and Wang , 1998 -RRB- , points out that some
European countries are already quite culturally and racially
diverse . That aside , he says , he does not believe that large-scale
migration is unavoidable .

`` I do n't think there is anything inevitable about anything when
it comes to demography , and I am a demographer , '' he said . And , he
said , European nations may not see the American example as worth
emulating .

`` It depends on what your goals are , '' he said . `` If your goals
are to maximize your gross domestic product then you probably do n't
want a labor force that is slowly declining in numbers , even if
their productivity is rising fast . If your goal is not GDP but GDP
per capita or the equitable distribution of GDP and a kind of
equilibrium , a kind of agreeable quality of life in your society ,
then you may not care as much . ''

Teitelbaum is saying , in effect , that the challenge may be what
Chamie predicts , but that Europeans may decide the cost of meeting
it is too high . He points to European feelings about American-style
capitalism .

`` There are many Europeans who hear Americans say how triumphant
the American economy is and how wonderful and prosperous it is and
they look at it and say , ` Gee , we do n't want to be like that , '' '
Teitelbaum said . `` ` It 's really two societies with the kind of
underclass that 's getting worse and worse off , more and more
marginalized . '' '

-LRB- MORE -RRB-

nn

UNDATED : more marginalized . '' '

Also , he said , not everybody has the same definition of
multiculturalism . `` The French think that what they call the
Anglo-Saxon model is a multicultural model of integration in which
everybody speaks their own language and does n't necessarily learn
the common language _ and they do n't really become British or
Canadian or American . They simply live in those countries and the
political system sort of stitches together compromises between
these groups . ''

`` The French image is quite different , but not xenophobic at
all , '' he said , recalling the numbers of Poles , Russians and others
who have settled over the century . Their model , he said , is `` that
anybody of any race , national origin or whatever can become French ,
but they 've got to really become French _ French defined in French
terms . '' Germany , with an ethnically based view of citizenship , has
had a different debate about immigration , he said .

Policies and programs to overcome hurdles like language barriers
are scant in much of Europe because cultural homogeneity has been
deeply valued , citizenship has often been defined ethnically or
linguistically , and the naturalization process that has made
Americans out of millions of foreigners does not exist .

For example , while Britain may now be the most racially diverse
and integrated nation in Europe , restrictions on immigrants from
outside the European Union remain . Skinhead violence against
non-Europeans has erupted from Scandinavia into Central and Eastern
Europe . In Denmark , a right-wing nationalist leader proposed
recently that all Muslims should be rounded up and put in camps .

`` You have European governments that continue to deploy the most
sophisticated forms of immigration control , '' said Arthur C.
Helton , an international lawyer who is now a senior fellow at the
Council on Foreign Relations . `` Yet European societies thirst ever
more for new blood and labor , which will come from outside of
Europe . ''

How to manage that ? Helton said the example of the United States
is instructive . Immigration there `` has not only inspired but
enforced a set of ways to manage conflict that Europeans are going
to have to either borrow or invent , '' he said . `` There is a
profound recognition by most Americans that this a country more
about change than about status . Europeans had better get ready for
change . ''

In Europe , protection of minorities is often seen as enough .
`` But people do n't want to be beneficiaries of minority rights
arrangements , '' Helton said . `` So there is a dilemma . Immigrants
want to preserve their language and culture but do not wish to be
stigmatized as second-class citizens . That 's a delicate balance
that often is missed , and it leads to intolerance , discrimination ,
backlash , race riots and the lot . ''

Teitelbaum says that this is where political leadership comes
in , and that is as difficult to predict as anything else . With the
combination of low fertility and high immigration , he said , `` you
can have everything from prosperous peace and comity to disastrous ,
disintegrative civil war . ''

`` A lot , '' he said , `` depends on the actions of political
leaderships , to either exploit fears or to try to deal with them . ''

UNDATED : more marginalized . '' '

Also , he said , not everybody has the same definition of
multiculturalism . `` The French think that what they call the
Anglo-Saxon model is a multicultural model of integration in which
everybody speaks their own language and does n't necessarily learn
the common language _ and they do n't really become British or
Canadian or American . They simply live in those countries and the
political system sort of stitches together compromises between
these groups . ''

`` The French image is quite different , but not xenophobic at
all , '' he said , recalling the numbers of Poles , Russians and others
who have settled over the century . Their model , he said , is `` that
anybody of any race , national origin or whatever can become French ,
but they 've got to really become French _ French defined in French
terms . '' Germany , with an ethnically based view of citizenship , has
had a different debate about immigration , he said .

Policies and programs to overcome hurdles like language barriers
are scant in much of Europe because cultural homogeneity has been
deeply valued , citizenship has often been defined ethnically or
linguistically , and the naturalization process that has made
Americans out of millions of foreigners does not exist .

For example , while Britain may now be the most racially diverse
and integrated nation in Europe , restrictions on immigrants from
outside the European Union remain . Skinhead violence against
non-Europeans has erupted from Scandinavia into Central and Eastern
Europe . In Denmark , a right-wing nationalist leader proposed
recently that all Muslims should be rounded up and put in camps .

`` You have European governments that continue to deploy the most
sophisticated forms of immigration control , '' said Arthur C.
Helton , an international lawyer who is now a senior fellow at the
Council on Foreign Relations . `` Yet European societies thirst ever
more for new blood and labor , which will come from outside of
Europe . ''

How to manage that ? Helton said the example of the United States
is instructive . Immigration there `` has not only inspired but
enforced a set of ways to manage conflict that Europeans are going
to have to either borrow or invent , '' he said . `` There is a
profound recognition by most Americans that this a country more
about change than about status . Europeans had better get ready for
change . ''

In Europe , protection of minorities is often seen as enough .
`` But people do n't want to be beneficiaries of minority rights
arrangements , '' Helton said . `` So there is a dilemma . Immigrants
want to preserve their language and culture but do not wish to be
stigmatized as second-class citizens . That 's a delicate balance
that often is missed , and it leads to intolerance , discrimination ,
backlash , race riots and the lot . ''

Teitelbaum says that this is where political leadership comes
in , and that is as difficult to predict as anything else . With the
combination of low fertility and high immigration , he said , `` you
can have everything from prosperous peace and comity to disastrous ,
disintegrative civil war . ''

`` A lot , '' he said , `` depends on the actions of political
leaderships , to either exploit fears or to try to deal with them . ''

Calif. -RRB-

Five years ago , responding to an increase in serious juvenile
crime , the state of Maryland initiated one of the nation 's largest
boot camp programs for teen-age criminals . The program , called the
Leadership Challenge , quickly became the model for other states .
But last week , after reviewing a task force report that documented
instances of physical abuse at their camps , Maryland officials
appeared on the verge of conceding that the current initiative was
a failure .

The Maryland experience , together with problems in other states ,
has already led some states to close their boot camps and even to
rethink how their penal laws treat young offenders . All in all , it
is a remarkable turn of events for an idea that was once greeted as
a breakthrough in the fight against juvenile crime

There is increasing evidence that boot-camps never worked . A
national study last year by the Koch Crime Institute , a public
policy group in Topeka , Kan. , showed that recidivism among boot
camp attendees ranged from 64 percent to 75 percent , slightly
higher than for youths sentenced to adult prisons .

Gerald Wells , a senior research associate at the Koch Institute ,
said of the report , `` The shocking parts are the allegations of
abuse , but the more alarming parts are the failures . ''

Research has also shown , according to Wells and other penal
justice experts , that these camps were grounded in a false and
unexamined assumption .

`` People thought boot camps shaped up a lot of servicemen during
three wars , '' Wells added . `` But just because you place someone in
a highly structured environment with discipline , does not mean once
they get home , and are out of that , they will be model citizens . ''

Boot camps have their roots in the 1970s , with the advent of
large , well-organized and extremely violent street gangs . In
response to these groups , many states began to imprison more young
people .

By the 1990s , as the number of repeat juvenile offenders rose to
record levels , it became clear that prison sentences were not
working . In 1994 , nearly 10,000 juveniles were charged with
criminal offenses , an all-time high . More than 2,300 of them were
charged with murder , compared with fewer than 1,000 in 1980 ,
according to the Justice Department 's Office of Juvenile Justice
and Delinquency Prevention . On any given day , about 105,000
children were in custody on criminal charges in the United States .

It was in this atmosphere that Maryland Lt. Gov. Kathleen
Kennedy Townsend began exploring the potential of boot camps .

Shortly after being elected with Gov. Parris Glendening in 1994 ,
Ms. Townsend , a former deputy assistant attorney general in the
Clinton administration , said she considered boot camps `` a
cost-effective , intermediate punishment '' and included them among
her priorities .

Ms. Townsend has said the idea came from visiting a juvenile
boot camp in Ohio . By then , a handful of states , including Georgia ,
Louisiana , West Virginia and Ohio , had begun well-publicized ,
promising experiments with juvenile camps .

The camps , modeled after similar programs that popped up in
England in the 1970s , were designed for juveniles who had committed
moderately serious crimes , such as auto theft , with the goal of
interceding before they moved to more serious crimes .

By 1997 , more than 27,000 teen-agers were passing through 54
camps in 23 states annually .

The people who ran the real boot camps , were quite skeptical .
`` The key reason we are successful is that we have a clientele down
here that chose to be here on their own , '' said Sgt. Maj. Ford
Kinsley , who oversees drill instructors at U.S. Marine Corps '
recruitment base in Parris Island , S.C. `` They are not here because
a judge said you should go here . Our population comes with a lot
more positive attitudes . ''

He said that when `` a kid graduates from Parris Island , he is
just beginning a four - or five-year enlistment in the Marine Corps .
It is not like they spend 11 months here and we just throw them out
onto the streets . ''

Then , too , the Marines traditionally chooses the best of its
noncommissioned officers as boot camp instructors . By contrast ,
state standards vary widely .

Rumors began to surface of beatings at Maryland 's boot camps
last August , and Ms. Townsend ordered an end to all inappropriate
physical contact . But news reports in December suggesting such
violations had continued led Ms. Townsend and Glendening to launch
an investigatory task force chaired by former Baltimore Police
Commissioner Bishop Robinson , who also spent 10 years in charge of
the state 's prison system .

On Dec. 15 , the task force released a report that accused guards
of routine and brutal beatings of inmates , and Glendening and Ms.
Townsend suspended the state 's camps and dismissed the top five
juvenile justice officials .

-LRB- MORE -RRB-

nn

Calif. -RRB-

Five years ago , responding to an increase in serious juvenile
crime , the state of Maryland initiated one of the nation 's largest
boot camp programs for teen-age criminals . The program , called the
Leadership Challenge , quickly became the model for other states .
But last week , after reviewing a task force report that documented
instances of physical abuse at their camps , Maryland officials
appeared on the verge of conceding that the current initiative was
a failure .

The Maryland experience , together with problems in other states ,
has already led some states to close their boot camps and even to
rethink how their penal laws treat young offenders . All in all , it
is a remarkable turn of events for an idea that was once greeted as
a breakthrough in the fight against juvenile crime

There is increasing evidence that boot-camps never worked . A
national study last year by the Koch Crime Institute , a public
policy group in Topeka , Kan. , showed that recidivism among boot
camp attendees ranged from 64 percent to 75 percent , slightly
higher than for youths sentenced to adult prisons .

Gerald Wells , a senior research associate at the Koch Institute ,
said of the report , `` The shocking parts are the allegations of
abuse , but the more alarming parts are the failures . ''

Research has also shown , according to Wells and other penal
justice experts , that these camps were grounded in a false and
unexamined assumption .

`` People thought boot camps shaped up a lot of servicemen during
three wars , '' Wells added . `` But just because you place someone in
a highly structured environment with discipline , does not mean once
they get home , and are out of that , they will be model citizens . ''

Boot camps have their roots in the 1970s , with the advent of
large , well-organized and extremely violent street gangs . In
response to these groups , many states began to imprison more young
people .

By the 1990s , as the number of repeat juvenile offenders rose to
record levels , it became clear that prison sentences were not
working . In 1994 , nearly 10,000 juveniles were charged with
criminal offenses , an all-time high . More than 2,300 of them were
charged with murder , compared with fewer than 1,000 in 1980 ,
according to the Justice Department 's Office of Juvenile Justice
and Delinquency Prevention . On any given day , about 105,000
children were in custody on criminal charges in the United States .

It was in this atmosphere that Maryland Lt. Gov. Kathleen
Kennedy Townsend began exploring the potential of boot camps .

Shortly after being elected with Gov. Parris Glendening in 1994 ,
Ms. Townsend , a former deputy assistant attorney general in the
Clinton administration , said she considered boot camps `` a
cost-effective , intermediate punishment '' and included them among
her priorities .

Ms. Townsend has said the idea came from visiting a juvenile
boot camp in Ohio . By then , a handful of states , including Georgia ,
Louisiana , West Virginia and Ohio , had begun well-publicized ,
promising experiments with juvenile camps .

The camps , modeled after similar programs that popped up in
England in the 1970s , were designed for juveniles who had committed
moderately serious crimes , such as auto theft , with the goal of
interceding before they moved to more serious crimes .

By 1997 , more than 27,000 teen-agers were passing through 54
camps in 23 states annually .

The people who ran the real boot camps , were quite skeptical .
`` The key reason we are successful is that we have a clientele down
here that chose to be here on their own , '' said Sgt. Maj. Ford
Kinsley , who oversees drill instructors at U.S. Marine Corps '
recruitment base in Parris Island , S.C. `` They are not here because
a judge said you should go here . Our population comes with a lot
more positive attitudes . ''

He said that when `` a kid graduates from Parris Island , he is
just beginning a four - or five-year enlistment in the Marine Corps .
It is not like they spend 11 months here and we just throw them out
onto the streets . ''

Then , too , the Marines traditionally chooses the best of its
noncommissioned officers as boot camp instructors . By contrast ,
state standards vary widely .

Rumors began to surface of beatings at Maryland 's boot camps
last August , and Ms. Townsend ordered an end to all inappropriate
physical contact . But news reports in December suggesting such
violations had continued led Ms. Townsend and Glendening to launch
an investigatory task force chaired by former Baltimore Police
Commissioner Bishop Robinson , who also spent 10 years in charge of
the state 's prison system .

On Dec. 15 , the task force released a report that accused guards
of routine and brutal beatings of inmates , and Glendening and Ms.
Townsend suspended the state 's camps and dismissed the top five
juvenile justice officials .

-LRB- MORE -RRB-

nn

UNDATED : justice officials .

Similar accusations have led state and local officials in
Colorado , North Dakota , and Arizona to drop their programs , while
Florida and California are scaling back theirs . In Georgia ,
officials revamped their program after a Justice Department
investigation concluded that the state 's `` paramilitary boot camp
model is not only ineffective , but harmful . ''

Some experts regard the entire boot camp experiment as a cynical
political maneuver . `` Boot camps were just another knee-jerk
reaction , a way to get tough with juveniles that resonated with the
public and became a political answer , '' said Dr. David Altschuler ,
a juvenile justice expert at the Institute for Policy Studies at
Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore .

Still , some believe the programs , in some form , can be useful .

`` These are tough kids , with tough problems , they need good
education and drug treatment and they also need to learn respect ,
self-respect , discipline and a new way of conducting themselves in
society , '' Ms. Townsend said . `` Facilities that provide structure
and discipline can be run effectively and have a role in our fight
after juvenile crime . ''

Many experts disagree , citing the expense of running such
programs properly .

`` It 's a budget issue , '' said Doris Mackenzie , a University of
Maryland criminology professor . `` They are popular in the public ,
people feel we should treat these kids tough , and everyone can get
onto the bandwagon , '' she said . `` But when it comes to this extra
expense of doing the follow-up , we find , the money is not there . ''

In any case , juvenile crime has been falling since 1994 , after
an overall drop in the nation 's juvenile population . This will make
it highly unlikely , say political observers , that voters will agree
to pay for individualized rehabilitation . Much more likely , they
say , is that the 27,000 young people who once went to boot camp
each year will instead be sent to prison .

As bad as boot camps have proven to be , Wells added , `` once you
start incarcerating kids , you have lost . But unfortunately , that is
where we seem headed . ''

UNDATED : justice officials .

Similar accusations have led state and local officials in
Colorado , North Dakota , and Arizona to drop their programs , while
Florida and California are scaling back theirs . In Georgia ,
officials revamped their program after a Justice Department
investigation concluded that the state 's `` paramilitary boot camp
model is not only ineffective , but harmful . ''

Some experts regard the entire boot camp experiment as a cynical
political maneuver . `` Boot camps were just another knee-jerk
reaction , a way to get tough with juveniles that resonated with the
public and became a political answer , '' said Dr. David Altschuler ,
a juvenile justice expert at the Institute for Policy Studies at
Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore .

Still , some believe the programs , in some form , can be useful .

`` These are tough kids , with tough problems , they need good
education and drug treatment and they also need to learn respect ,
self-respect , discipline and a new way of conducting themselves in
society , '' Ms. Townsend said . `` Facilities that provide structure
and discipline can be run effectively and have a role in our fight
after juvenile crime . ''

Many experts disagree , citing the expense of running such
programs properly .

`` It 's a budget issue , '' said Doris Mackenzie , a University of
Maryland criminology professor . `` They are popular in the public ,
people feel we should treat these kids tough , and everyone can get
onto the bandwagon , '' she said . `` But when it comes to this extra
expense of doing the follow-up , we find , the money is not there . ''

In any case , juvenile crime has been falling since 1994 , after
an overall drop in the nation 's juvenile population . This will make
it highly unlikely , say political observers , that voters will agree
to pay for individualized rehabilitation . Much more likely , they
say , is that the 27,000 young people who once went to boot camp
each year will instead be sent to prison .

As bad as boot camps have proven to be , Wells added , `` once you
start incarcerating kids , you have lost . But unfortunately , that is
where we seem headed . ''

ALGERIA : WHY IT 'S IMPORTANT TO AMERICA

High above the sparkling blue sweep of the Bay of Algiers , with
panoramic views over whitewashed colonial palaces and palm-treed
gardens that still make the city one of the jewels of the
Mediterranean , there is a magnificent hostelry .

Once a palace , it became , at the height of France 's 130 years of
colonial rule in Algeria , the St. George 's Hotel . On an upper
floor , with a balcony scented in the springtime with mimosa
blossoms , there is a suite with a brass plaque at the door
recording the fact that General Dwight D. Eisenhower occupied the
suite for several months in 1942 and 1943 , when U.S. and allied
troops were pushing German forces eastward along the north African
coast during World War II . Everyone knew , in that dark winter , the
strategic importance of Algeria .

But that moment , during the climactic war of the 20th century ,
may have been the last time the American public really focused its
attention on Algeria . Today , amid fears of a new kind of warfare _
far less intense but nonetheless frightening _ Algeria is once
again thrusting itself onto America 's consciousness , now that
figures linked to its Islamic underground have been arrested while
seemingly intent on bringing their terrorist war into the United
States .

It is , of course , an utterly different Algeria . Today , the St.
George 's is the El-Djazair Hotel , state-owned like much else in
independent Algeria , its lobby re-done in the over-marbled ,
socialist-modern style familiar from visits to communist Eastern
Europe . The armchairs by the front door are occupied 24 hours a day
by the slim-hipped , chain-smoking watchdogs of the Algerian
security police , without whose guardianship no trip outside the
hotel by foreigners is allowed .

Americans hardly ever come . They have been warned off by nearly
40 years of military-dominated government since independence , by
socialist economic policies that have all but wrecked the economy ,
and above all by an eight-year civil war . The conflict has been one
of the most savage anywhere since Algeria 's previous conflict , the
one from 1954 to 1962 in which the French colonial army fought
fruitlessly to stave off independence . About a million people died
in that earlier fighting , and so far about 100,000 have died in the
current carnage . Many of the new victims have died at the hands of
a shadowy guerrilla movement known , by its French initials , as the
GIA _ the Armed Islamic Group .

If a visitor wants to know something about the GIA , or about the
wider conflict in which it has been fighting for an extreme form of
Islamic rule , there are few better places to venture than up the
hill from the El-Djazair , to one of the grandest U.S. embassies
anywhere , set in breathtakingly lovely grounds .

Here , amid graceful inner courtyards and arches , U.S. diplomats
have a command of the political and economic miseries beyond the
embassy 's high walls . The view is all the more impressive for the
fact that the Algerian security police , and the State Department 's
own rules , make venturing out of the compound about as easy as
heading out from a cavalry fort in Indian country . The current
ambassador , Cameron Hume , a man of formidable charm and intellect ,
has defied the security rules to travel about more than most
ambassadors , but even he would not exactly claim to be a denizen of
the place .

All of which may go some way to explain why , two weeks ago , many
Americans were puzzled to learn that an Algerian man had been
arrested while driving off a car ferry from Canada at Port Angeles ,
Wash. , with , U.S. customs officials allege , enough bomb-making
material in the trunk of his car to blow up almost any building .
Suddenly there were headlines across America about Ahmed Ressam and
the wider terrorist threat he has been thought to represent . But
what of the country he hails from , and why might he have wanted to
bomb a target in the United States ? Above all , what is it that
Americans must now begin to understand about Algeria ?

The plain fact is that Algeria , however distant it has grown to
Americans since it made headlines for them during World War II ,
remains of enormous strategic importance .

Not only is it the largest country on the African continent , in
terms of area ; it also has vast oil and gas reserves that have kept
American oilmen barracked at remote sites in the Sahara desert for
30 years or more . Today , they are in fact the most numerous
Americans in Algeria , even if for the most part they pass swiftly
through Algiers and the other major cities , and have little contact
with the larger society .

-LRB- MORE -RRB-

nn

ALGERIA : WHY IT 'S IMPORTANT TO AMERICA

High above the sparkling blue sweep of the Bay of Algiers , with
panoramic views over whitewashed colonial palaces and palm-treed
gardens that still make the city one of the jewels of the
Mediterranean , there is a magnificent hostelry .

Once a palace , it became , at the height of France 's 130 years of
colonial rule in Algeria , the St. George 's Hotel . On an upper
floor , with a balcony scented in the springtime with mimosa
blossoms , there is a suite with a brass plaque at the door
recording the fact that General Dwight D. Eisenhower occupied the
suite for several months in 1942 and 1943 , when U.S. and allied
troops were pushing German forces eastward along the north African
coast during World War II . Everyone knew , in that dark winter , the
strategic importance of Algeria .

But that moment , during the climactic war of the 20th century ,
may have been the last time the American public really focused its
attention on Algeria . Today , amid fears of a new kind of warfare _
far less intense but nonetheless frightening _ Algeria is once
again thrusting itself onto America 's consciousness , now that
figures linked to its Islamic underground have been arrested while
seemingly intent on bringing their terrorist war into the United
States .

It is , of course , an utterly different Algeria . Today , the St.
George 's is the El-Djazair Hotel , state-owned like much else in
independent Algeria , its lobby re-done in the over-marbled ,
socialist-modern style familiar from visits to communist Eastern
Europe . The armchairs by the front door are occupied 24 hours a day
by the slim-hipped , chain-smoking watchdogs of the Algerian
security police , without whose guardianship no trip outside the
hotel by foreigners is allowed .

Americans hardly ever come . They have been warned off by nearly
40 years of military-dominated government since independence , by
socialist economic policies that have all but wrecked the economy ,
and above all by an eight-year civil war . The conflict has been one
of the most savage anywhere since Algeria 's previous conflict , the
one from 1954 to 1962 in which the French colonial army fought
fruitlessly to stave off independence . About a million people died
in that earlier fighting , and so far about 100,000 have died in the
current carnage . Many of the new victims have died at the hands of
a shadowy guerrilla movement known , by its French initials , as the
GIA _ the Armed Islamic Group .

If a visitor wants to know something about the GIA , or about the
wider conflict in which it has been fighting for an extreme form of
Islamic rule , there are few better places to venture than up the
hill from the El-Djazair , to one of the grandest U.S. embassies
anywhere , set in breathtakingly lovely grounds .

Here , amid graceful inner courtyards and arches , U.S. diplomats
have a command of the political and economic miseries beyond the
embassy 's high walls . The view is all the more impressive for the
fact that the Algerian security police , and the State Department 's
own rules , make venturing out of the compound about as easy as
heading out from a cavalry fort in Indian country . The current
ambassador , Cameron Hume , a man of formidable charm and intellect ,
has defied the security rules to travel about more than most
ambassadors , but even he would not exactly claim to be a denizen of
the place .

All of which may go some way to explain why , two weeks ago , many
Americans were puzzled to learn that an Algerian man had been
arrested while driving off a car ferry from Canada at Port Angeles ,
Wash. , with , U.S. customs officials allege , enough bomb-making
material in the trunk of his car to blow up almost any building .
Suddenly there were headlines across America about Ahmed Ressam and
the wider terrorist threat he has been thought to represent . But
what of the country he hails from , and why might he have wanted to
bomb a target in the United States ? Above all , what is it that
Americans must now begin to understand about Algeria ?

The plain fact is that Algeria , however distant it has grown to
Americans since it made headlines for them during World War II ,
remains of enormous strategic importance .

Not only is it the largest country on the African continent , in
terms of area ; it also has vast oil and gas reserves that have kept
American oilmen barracked at remote sites in the Sahara desert for
30 years or more . Today , they are in fact the most numerous
Americans in Algeria , even if for the most part they pass swiftly
through Algiers and the other major cities , and have little contact
with the larger society .

-LRB- MORE -RRB-

nn

UNDATED : larger society .

As significant as its resources , Algeria fills a long stretch of
the southern Mediterranean , and thus is of compelling military and
political significance . And what happens is Algeria is of profound
significance to many of America 's key allies in Western Europe .
Algiers is only an overnight ferry journey from Marseilles and even
closer to Spain , allowing Algeria 's enfeebled economy to send at
least 3 million Algerians to Europe as immigrant workers in recent
years .

And then there is the war , and how it may have led to Ressam
driving off that ferry in Washington state . In this , perhaps more
than anything else , Algeria matters to Americans these days .

In the history of modern Islamic radicalism , two countries have
played pivotal roles _ Iran toward one end of the so-called
`` crescent '' of Muslim nations that reaches from Morocco and
Mauritania in the west to Afghanistan and Pakistan in the east , and
Algeria toward the other end .

Twenty years ago Iran mesmerized the world with its mullahs '
revolution , with its seizure of U.S. diplomats and their embassy in
Tehran and , later , with the religious decree that urged the killing
of the novelist Salman Rushdie . Algeria , in 1992 , lit fires of
equal intensity among Islamic radicals when its secular government
called parliamentary elections , the first more-or-less free ones in
the country 's history , but canceled them at the last minute when an
Islamic party , the Islamic Salvation Front , was on the verge of
victory . The army generals had thought canceling the elections was
a good idea ; their reward was the rise of the G.I.A. , a breakaway
from the Islamic Salvation Front . Rather than try again for a
generally moderate form of Islamic government , this group espoused
worldwide holy war , going well beyond the Salvation Front
prescriptions .

The conflict that resulted brought to Algeria a ghastliness that
has been stunning , even by the standards of a country that knew
extraordinary savagery , on both the French and the Algerian sides ,
during the independence war . The GIA , propagating among its
fighters the belief that the triumph of Islam justifies the killing
of anybody who does not actively support them , has gone into
villages and towns and slaughtered hundreds of civilians at a time ,
often by cutting throats .

The army has responded in kind , setting up militias called
`` Patriotes '' and other shadowy units ; these are believed to have
taken a leaf from France 's counter-insurgency tactics in the 1950s ,
when `` rogue '' units set up to look like fighters of the
independence guerrillas went about massacring villagers . Several
thousand people have disappeared after being arrested by the army
and police , and cemeteries in Algiers and elsewhere are strewn with
gravestones carrying the sinister marking `` X Algerien , '' often
meaning that the person buried there was killed in custody and
buried anonymously .

From this background have sprung faceless battalions of the GIA
in Europe , and from among them , investigators believe , came Ressam .
So if he is another kind of `` X Algerien '' to Americans , it may be
time to strip away that anonymity , to learn more about him and his
country and their tragedies .

Six decades ago , a U.S. general in Room 1101 at the St. George 's
Hotel learned at first hand why Algeria mattered ; it is a lesson
that it may be time to relearn .

UNDATED : larger society .

As significant as its resources , Algeria fills a long stretch of
the southern Mediterranean , and thus is of compelling military and
political significance . And what happens is Algeria is of profound
significance to many of America 's key allies in Western Europe .
Algiers is only an overnight ferry journey from Marseilles and even
closer to Spain , allowing Algeria 's enfeebled economy to send at
least 3 million Algerians to Europe as immigrant workers in recent
years .

And then there is the war , and how it may have led to Ressam
driving off that ferry in Washington state . In this , perhaps more
than anything else , Algeria matters to Americans these days .

In the history of modern Islamic radicalism , two countries have
played pivotal roles _ Iran toward one end of the so-called
`` crescent '' of Muslim nations that reaches from Morocco and
Mauritania in the west to Afghanistan and Pakistan in the east , and
Algeria toward the other end .

Twenty years ago Iran mesmerized the world with its mullahs '
revolution , with its seizure of U.S. diplomats and their embassy in
Tehran and , later , with the religious decree that urged the killing
of the novelist Salman Rushdie . Algeria , in 1992 , lit fires of
equal intensity among Islamic radicals when its secular government
called parliamentary elections , the first more-or-less free ones in
the country 's history , but canceled them at the last minute when an
Islamic party , the Islamic Salvation Front , was on the verge of
victory . The army generals had thought canceling the elections was
a good idea ; their reward was the rise of the G.I.A. , a breakaway
from the Islamic Salvation Front . Rather than try again for a
generally moderate form of Islamic government , this group espoused
worldwide holy war , going well beyond the Salvation Front
prescriptions .

The conflict that resulted brought to Algeria a ghastliness that
has been stunning , even by the standards of a country that knew
extraordinary savagery , on both the French and the Algerian sides ,
during the independence war . The GIA , propagating among its
fighters the belief that the triumph of Islam justifies the killing
of anybody who does not actively support them , has gone into
villages and towns and slaughtered hundreds of civilians at a time ,
often by cutting throats .

The army has responded in kind , setting up militias called
`` Patriotes '' and other shadowy units ; these are believed to have
taken a leaf from France 's counter-insurgency tactics in the 1950s ,
when `` rogue '' units set up to look like fighters of the
independence guerrillas went about massacring villagers . Several
thousand people have disappeared after being arrested by the army
and police , and cemeteries in Algiers and elsewhere are strewn with
gravestones carrying the sinister marking `` X Algerien , '' often
meaning that the person buried there was killed in custody and
buried anonymously .

From this background have sprung faceless battalions of the GIA
in Europe , and from among them , investigators believe , came Ressam .
So if he is another kind of `` X Algerien '' to Americans , it may be
time to strip away that anonymity , to learn more about him and his
country and their tragedies .

Six decades ago , a U.S. general in Room 1101 at the St. George 's
Hotel learned at first hand why Algeria mattered ; it is a lesson
that it may be time to relearn .

SLAUGHTER IN AFRICA : NOT AS SIMPLE AS ANCIENT HATREDS

Distrust of ethnic strangers runs so deep in
Burundi that there is a special insult _ `` ikimenabanga '' _ for the
person within a group who says too much , the one who breaks the
secret . It is safer to stay quiet , to keep to one 's own kind .

But there is a great distance between that kind of simple
suspicion and the hatreds that seem to have exploded in the last
decade with relentless regularity in Burundi , Rwanda and eastern
Congo _ the Great Lakes area of Africa . Documented genocide
occurred there in 1994 , when Hutu extremists in Rwanda meticulously
slaughtered at least half a million ethnic Tutsi . The fighting
continued in the form of a rebellion within Rwanda and spilled into
Congo _ then known as Zaire _ helping to shatter that country in
1997 . Burundi has been rent by civil warfare that started in 1993 .

Today , Hutu fighters who fled Rwanda in 1994 are preying there
again , in a war that has dragged in at least eight other nations .
And in Burundi , Rwanda 's southern twin , the Tutsi elite who rule
the country have herded into hillside camps 350,000 people , most of
them Hutu farmers , to separate them from Hutu guerrillas .

All of this fighting makes Africa 's Great Lakes region one of
the most grim and complicated places on earth , one where
well-intentioned outsiders periodically wonder whether , and how ,
they might step in to halt the violence . Each time , the question
comes down to this : Are these spasms of killing the result of old
hatreds , or are they grotesque products of political manipulation ?

To many outsiders `` ancient tribal hatreds '' has been the
formula easiest to accept , since it lends a patina of logic to
indifference _ to saying that there is little that outsiders could
do , even if they were willing . That is a position that underlay the
outside world 's inaction during the 1994 genocide in Rwanda .

But that is not what most experts on Africa say . The hatreds are
real , the experts say , but they are not ancient at all _ and are
not really different from ethnic conflicts anywhere else .

In broad outline , the conflicts in Africa are quite like those
in the Balkans : Ancient divisions , even animosities , exist , but it
takes a political elite to seize on them and transform them into
something far more violent as politicians seek power for
themselves .

`` It certainly is not ancient ethnic or tribal hatred , '' said
Filip Reyntjens , a professor at the Universities of Antwerp and
Leuven and a leading scholar of the Great Lakes region . `` That is a
vision many Europeans and North Americans have because it is an
easy way to explain what happens in Africa . ''

Scholars generally agree on the ethnic shape of the Great Lakes
before the colonists _ first Germans , then Belgians _ arrived in
the late 19th century . There were three distinct groups of people :
the Hutu , who tended to be farmers -LRB- more than 80 percent today -RRB- ;
the Tutsi , who arrived on the land later as nomads and tended to
raise cattle -LRB- about 15 percent -RRB- ; and the Twa , or pygmies -LRB- perhaps 1
percent -RRB- . There were rivalries , even animosities , but none of the
episodes of ethnic killing that have scarred the recent past .

Except for the Twa _ who were truly discriminated against _ the
lines between Hutu and Tutsi were not always firm . The monarchies
in pre-colonial Rwanda and Burundi were led by Tutsi but high court
officials were often Hutu . Intermarriage was common , even if there
were tensions between ruler and ruled .

Along came the European colonists , who imposed their own ideas
about race and superiority , and tended to put one group officially
in power over the others . They preferred the Tutsi , who were viewed
as taller , thinner , smarter -LRB- and thus more like the Europeans -RRB- .

`` The Batutsi were meant to reign , '' wrote one Belgian
administrator in the 1920 's , according to the French author Gerard
Prunier in his authoritative book on the genocide , `` The Rwanda
Crisis '' -LRB- Columbia University Press , 1995 -RRB- . `` Their fine presence is
in itself enough to give them a great prestige vis-a-vis the
inferior races which surround . It is not surprising that those good
Bahutu , less intelligent , more simple , more spontaneous , more
trusting , have let themselves be enslaved without ever daring to
revolt . ''

What the colonists did , said Alison Des Forges , a historian and
consultant for Human Rights Watch , `` was take this system that was
relatively fluid and turned it into something very rigid and
hierarchical . ''

B Y the time the Belgians were preparing to withdraw from Rwanda
and Burundi in the late 1950s , many experts argue , the lines
between Hutu and Tutsi were firmly drawn , and resentment among the
Hutu was strong .

First , in Rwanda , Hutu clamoring for power killed many Tutsi in
1959 ; partly in response , the Tutsi elite in Burundi hardened their
control . -LRB- The Rwanda fighting also created a group of Tutsi exiles
whose children would become the guerrillas who took control in
1994 . -RRB- In Burundi , a unifying figure , Prince Louis Rwagasore , arose
among the Tutsi but was assassinated in 1961 .

-LRB- MORE -RRB-

nn

SLAUGHTER IN AFRICA : NOT AS SIMPLE AS ANCIENT HATREDS

Distrust of ethnic strangers runs so deep in
Burundi that there is a special insult _ `` ikimenabanga '' _ for the
person within a group who says too much , the one who breaks the
secret . It is safer to stay quiet , to keep to one 's own kind .

But there is a great distance between that kind of simple
suspicion and the hatreds that seem to have exploded in the last
decade with relentless regularity in Burundi , Rwanda and eastern
Congo _ the Great Lakes area of Africa . Documented genocide
occurred there in 1994 , when Hutu extremists in Rwanda meticulously
slaughtered at least half a million ethnic Tutsi . The fighting
continued in the form of a rebellion within Rwanda and spilled into
Congo _ then known as Zaire _ helping to shatter that country in
1997 . Burundi has been rent by civil warfare that started in 1993 .

Today , Hutu fighters who fled Rwanda in 1994 are preying there
again , in a war that has dragged in at least eight other nations .
And in Burundi , Rwanda 's southern twin , the Tutsi elite who rule
the country have herded into hillside camps 350,000 people , most of
them Hutu farmers , to separate them from Hutu guerrillas .

All of this fighting makes Africa 's Great Lakes region one of
the most grim and complicated places on earth , one where
well-intentioned outsiders periodically wonder whether , and how ,
they might step in to halt the violence . Each time , the question
comes down to this : Are these spasms of killing the result of old
hatreds , or are they grotesque products of political manipulation ?

To many outsiders `` ancient tribal hatreds '' has been the
formula easiest to accept , since it lends a patina of logic to
indifference _ to saying that there is little that outsiders could
do , even if they were willing . That is a position that underlay the
outside world 's inaction during the 1994 genocide in Rwanda .

But that is not what most experts on Africa say . The hatreds are
real , the experts say , but they are not ancient at all _ and are
not really different from ethnic conflicts anywhere else .

In broad outline , the conflicts in Africa are quite like those
in the Balkans : Ancient divisions , even animosities , exist , but it
takes a political elite to seize on them and transform them into
something far more violent as politicians seek power for
themselves .

`` It certainly is not ancient ethnic or tribal hatred , '' said
Filip Reyntjens , a professor at the Universities of Antwerp and
Leuven and a leading scholar of the Great Lakes region . `` That is a
vision many Europeans and North Americans have because it is an
easy way to explain what happens in Africa . ''

Scholars generally agree on the ethnic shape of the Great Lakes
before the colonists _ first Germans , then Belgians _ arrived in
the late 19th century . There were three distinct groups of people :
the Hutu , who tended to be farmers -LRB- more than 80 percent today -RRB- ;
the Tutsi , who arrived on the land later as nomads and tended to
raise cattle -LRB- about 15 percent -RRB- ; and the Twa , or pygmies -LRB- perhaps 1
percent -RRB- . There were rivalries , even animosities , but none of the
episodes of ethnic killing that have scarred the recent past .

Except for the Twa _ who were truly discriminated against _ the
lines between Hutu and Tutsi were not always firm . The monarchies
in pre-colonial Rwanda and Burundi were led by Tutsi but high court
officials were often Hutu . Intermarriage was common , even if there
were tensions between ruler and ruled .

Along came the European colonists , who imposed their own ideas
about race and superiority , and tended to put one group officially
in power over the others . They preferred the Tutsi , who were viewed
as taller , thinner , smarter -LRB- and thus more like the Europeans -RRB- .

`` The Batutsi were meant to reign , '' wrote one Belgian
administrator in the 1920 's , according to the French author Gerard
Prunier in his authoritative book on the genocide , `` The Rwanda
Crisis '' -LRB- Columbia University Press , 1995 -RRB- . `` Their fine presence is
in itself enough to give them a great prestige vis-a-vis the
inferior races which surround . It is not surprising that those good
Bahutu , less intelligent , more simple , more spontaneous , more
trusting , have let themselves be enslaved without ever daring to
revolt . ''

What the colonists did , said Alison Des Forges , a historian and
consultant for Human Rights Watch , `` was take this system that was
relatively fluid and turned it into something very rigid and
hierarchical . ''

B Y the time the Belgians were preparing to withdraw from Rwanda
and Burundi in the late 1950s , many experts argue , the lines
between Hutu and Tutsi were firmly drawn , and resentment among the
Hutu was strong .

First , in Rwanda , Hutu clamoring for power killed many Tutsi in
1959 ; partly in response , the Tutsi elite in Burundi hardened their
control . -LRB- The Rwanda fighting also created a group of Tutsi exiles
whose children would become the guerrillas who took control in
1994 . -RRB- In Burundi , a unifying figure , Prince Louis Rwagasore , arose
among the Tutsi but was assassinated in 1961 .

-LRB- MORE -RRB-

nn

NAIROBI : in 1961 .

After independence came to both nations in 1962 , the
polarization in both only increased with round after round of
ethnic slaughters . People were killed merely for belonging to one
ethnic group or the other , something that had never happened in
either country .

In Rwanda , that cycle came to a crisis under the presidency of
Juvenal Habyarimana , a Hutu whose administration demonized all
Tutsi as supporters of rebels fighting to oust him . His death in a
plane crash in April 1994 , in which the Burundian president also
died , set off the 100 days of slaughter of Tutsis .

Now the problems continue with the war in Congo and the
seemingly intractable battles between the Hutu rebels and Tutsi
leadership in Burundi . There is not a great deal of hope among most
experts that the problems will be settled soon .

`` It seems to me that we are now in a situation where fear has
become the most powerful spur to violence , '' Ms. Des Forges said .

Still , these experts believe there is room for the outside world
to become engaged . The ideal for beginning to rebuild trust , Ms.
Des Forges said , is that outside nations find a way to guarantee
that there will be no more ethnic slaughters in either country For
Rwanda , she added , the international community could show
evenhandedness not only by continuing to bring the Hutu killers to
justice but by not ignoring abuses committed by the Tutsi leaders .

In Burundi , Jan van Eck , a consultant with the Center for
Conflict Resolution in Cape Town , said that each party must have a
place at the negotiating table _ an approach that seems to have
been adopted by the new mediator to the conflict , Nelson Mandela ,
who has some experience as a uniting force in his own country ,
South Africa .

Oddly , van Eck pointed out , the amount of blood already spilled
may at this point become an argument for ending the violence . In
Burundi , for example , so many people have blood on their hands _
Hutu and Tutsi alike _ that their own mutually awful pasts may
offer an opening for starting anew . `` They always said : Hang all
the people who committed crimes , or shoot them , '' van Eck said .
`` But now there is a realization that there might be too many . ''

NAIROBI : in 1961 .

After independence came to both nations in 1962 , the
polarization in both only increased with round after round of
ethnic slaughters . People were killed merely for belonging to one
ethnic group or the other , something that had never happened in
either country .

In Rwanda , that cycle came to a crisis under the presidency of
Juvenal Habyarimana , a Hutu whose administration demonized all
Tutsi as supporters of rebels fighting to oust him . His death in a
plane crash in April 1994 , in which the Burundian president also
died , set off the 100 days of slaughter of Tutsis .

Now the problems continue with the war in Congo and the
seemingly intractable battles between the Hutu rebels and Tutsi
leadership in Burundi . There is not a great deal of hope among most
experts that the problems will be settled soon .

`` It seems to me that we are now in a situation where fear has
become the most powerful spur to violence , '' Ms. Des Forges said .

Still , these experts believe there is room for the outside world
to become engaged . The ideal for beginning to rebuild trust , Ms.
Des Forges said , is that outside nations find a way to guarantee
that there will be no more ethnic slaughters in either country For
Rwanda , she added , the international community could show
evenhandedness not only by continuing to bring the Hutu killers to
justice but by not ignoring abuses committed by the Tutsi leaders .

In Burundi , Jan van Eck , a consultant with the Center for
Conflict Resolution in Cape Town , said that each party must have a
place at the negotiating table _ an approach that seems to have
been adopted by the new mediator to the conflict , Nelson Mandela ,
who has some experience as a uniting force in his own country ,
South Africa .

Oddly , van Eck pointed out , the amount of blood already spilled
may at this point become an argument for ending the violence . In
Burundi , for example , so many people have blood on their hands _
Hutu and Tutsi alike _ that their own mutually awful pasts may
offer an opening for starting anew . `` They always said : Hang all
the people who committed crimes , or shoot them , '' van Eck said .
`` But now there is a realization that there might be too many . ''

WHAT A GREAT PRIMARY CAMPAIGN WE JUST HAD !

For much of the American public , the 2000 election for the White
House starts at the beginning of January . The holidays have passed
and in a presidential election year that means that the country is
ready to attend to what the candidates are doing and saying .

Or rather , done and said . The truth is that most people are
tuning in rather late . In all likelihood , the Democratic and
Republican contests will be settled in just nine weeks , if not by
the first week of February .

Since 1976 , more and more states have inched their primaries
back to the starting line , competing to assure their influence over
the nominee . It has been a haphazard process , following no grand
plan of either party , if countenanced by some Republican and
Democratic leaders who believe that avoiding an intramural primary
struggle is the recipe for a strong general election nominee . The
result , though , is that nearly 75 percent of the delegates will be
chosen by the middle of March , even as the primaries continue
through June 6 .

But is that progress ? As the primary season begins in earnest ,
there seems to be a consensus among political leaders and academics
that it is not : that this constant tinkering with the political
calendar has produced the opposite of what had been intended .

Instead of a nominating process that engages voters , the
ever-shortening calendar is more apt to disenfranchise them , with
its early finish and narrow window within which to consider the
candidates . Instead of assuring big states a big voice in the final
nominee , the calendar dilutes their influence , since so many of
them have crowded their primaries onto the same two early Tuesdays .

And , instead of producing formidable general election
standard-bearers , the process turns out nominees who might , come
the tumult of the fall campaign , wish they had devoted more time to
what is the political equivalent of spring training .

`` People are being rushed to judgment , '' said William Galvin ,
the Massachusetts secretary of state and the chairman of the
Committee on Presidential Primaries of the National Association of
Secretaries of State . `` It 's become a candidate death watch ,
instead of an effort at finding out who these people are . ''

Consider this : well before January , a series of presumably
credible candidates for president _ among them , former Tennessee
Gov. Lamar Alexander and and former Transportation Secretary
Elizabeth Dole _ had already quit the race , largely because they
could not figure out how to surmount the political calendar . The
exhausting schedule of cross-country primaries that awaits the
field on March 7 and March 14 has put a premium on the
candidate-as-fund-raiser , in order to raise the money to finance
travel and multistate advertising .

Inevitably , that suffocates the long-shot candidate , like Paul
Tsongas in 1992 or Bruce Babbitt in 1988 , who had once put
excitement into American politics .

Candidates are , of course , supposed to drop out if they do badly
in New Hampshire and Iowa . But not to even make it to the startling
line ? `` This is the first year that I can remember where a whole
lot of candidates dropped out before a single vote was cast , '' said
William G. Mayer , a professor of political science at Northeast
University and co-author of `` The Modern Politics of Presidential
Selection . ''

Iowans and New Hampshirites , long used to being the first judges
of candidates ' credentials and ideas , may be excused for feeling a
little rushed . As big states have shouldered to the front of the
primary line , New Hampshire and Iowa have edged back to protect
their historic first-in-the-nation status . The New Hampshire
primary is now Feb. 1 , or 20 days earlier than it was in 1996 , a
long time in retail politics .

Political campaigns remain engaging and meaningful to many
Americans in part because voters are so unpredictable _ especially
in New Hampshire and Iowa . That said , most analysts believe the
nominees will be known by the close-of-polls on March 7 , by which
time 43 percent of the elected Republican delegates and 37 percent
of the Democratic delegates will have been selected . And if not
then , certainly by the following week .

`` It 's like 75 percent of the delegates have been selected by
the middle of March , which is faster than last time , '' said Barbara
Norrander , professor of political science at the University of
Arizona . `` And last time it was faster than the time before . ''

Indeed , it is conceivable that the race could be over on Feb. 1 ,
especially on the Republican side . If Sen. John McCain fails to
defeat Texas Gov. George W. Bush in New Hampshire , after waging a
spirited campaign there , his own supporters have trouble seeing how
he could survive .

Similarly , a number of Democrats question how long former Sen.
Bill Bradley can continue if he does not make a strong showing
against Vice President Al Gore there -LRB- presumably a victory , though
a near-victory has done the trick for candidates in the past -RRB- .

McCain and Bradley are both examples of the type of candidates
who have historically flourished in New Hampshire : slightly
insurgent and underfunded . But even if both should win there , the
calendar works against them pushing on to the nomination .

There are no Democratic primaries until March 7 , but there are
16 contests on that day , from New York to California . It is worse
for McCain . Before March 7 , he faces contests in South Carolina ,
Arizona and Michigan . That schedule could not be more problematic
for an underfunded candidate running outside of the establishment .
Nor could it be more accommodating for Bush , who spent much of last
year raising money to prepare himself precisely for this moment .

-LRB- MORE -RRB-

nn

WHAT A GREAT PRIMARY CAMPAIGN WE JUST HAD !

For much of the American public , the 2000 election for the White
House starts at the beginning of January . The holidays have passed
and in a presidential election year that means that the country is
ready to attend to what the candidates are doing and saying .

Or rather , done and said . The truth is that most people are
tuning in rather late . In all likelihood , the Democratic and
Republican contests will be settled in just nine weeks , if not by
the first week of February .

Since 1976 , more and more states have inched their primaries
back to the starting line , competing to assure their influence over
the nominee . It has been a haphazard process , following no grand
plan of either party , if countenanced by some Republican and
Democratic leaders who believe that avoiding an intramural primary
struggle is the recipe for a strong general election nominee . The
result , though , is that nearly 75 percent of the delegates will be
chosen by the middle of March , even as the primaries continue
through June 6 .

But is that progress ? As the primary season begins in earnest ,
there seems to be a consensus among political leaders and academics
that it is not : that this constant tinkering with the political
calendar has produced the opposite of what had been intended .

Instead of a nominating process that engages voters , the
ever-shortening calendar is more apt to disenfranchise them , with
its early finish and narrow window within which to consider the
candidates . Instead of assuring big states a big voice in the final
nominee , the calendar dilutes their influence , since so many of
them have crowded their primaries onto the same two early Tuesdays .

And , instead of producing formidable general election
standard-bearers , the process turns out nominees who might , come
the tumult of the fall campaign , wish they had devoted more time to
what is the political equivalent of spring training .

`` People are being rushed to judgment , '' said William Galvin ,
the Massachusetts secretary of state and the chairman of the
Committee on Presidential Primaries of the National Association of
Secretaries of State . `` It 's become a candidate death watch ,
instead of an effort at finding out who these people are . ''

Consider this : well before January , a series of presumably
credible candidates for president _ among them , former Tennessee
Gov. Lamar Alexander and and former Transportation Secretary
Elizabeth Dole _ had already quit the race , largely because they
could not figure out how to surmount the political calendar . The
exhausting schedule of cross-country primaries that awaits the
field on March 7 and March 14 has put a premium on the
candidate-as-fund-raiser , in order to raise the money to finance
travel and multistate advertising .

Inevitably , that suffocates the long-shot candidate , like Paul
Tsongas in 1992 or Bruce Babbitt in 1988 , who had once put
excitement into American politics .

Candidates are , of course , supposed to drop out if they do badly
in New Hampshire and Iowa . But not to even make it to the startling
line ? `` This is the first year that I can remember where a whole
lot of candidates dropped out before a single vote was cast , '' said
William G. Mayer , a professor of political science at Northeast
University and co-author of `` The Modern Politics of Presidential
Selection . ''

Iowans and New Hampshirites , long used to being the first judges
of candidates ' credentials and ideas , may be excused for feeling a
little rushed . As big states have shouldered to the front of the
primary line , New Hampshire and Iowa have edged back to protect
their historic first-in-the-nation status . The New Hampshire
primary is now Feb. 1 , or 20 days earlier than it was in 1996 , a
long time in retail politics .

Political campaigns remain engaging and meaningful to many
Americans in part because voters are so unpredictable _ especially
in New Hampshire and Iowa . That said , most analysts believe the
nominees will be known by the close-of-polls on March 7 , by which
time 43 percent of the elected Republican delegates and 37 percent
of the Democratic delegates will have been selected . And if not
then , certainly by the following week .

`` It 's like 75 percent of the delegates have been selected by
the middle of March , which is faster than last time , '' said Barbara
Norrander , professor of political science at the University of
Arizona . `` And last time it was faster than the time before . ''

Indeed , it is conceivable that the race could be over on Feb. 1 ,
especially on the Republican side . If Sen. John McCain fails to
defeat Texas Gov. George W. Bush in New Hampshire , after waging a
spirited campaign there , his own supporters have trouble seeing how
he could survive .

Similarly , a number of Democrats question how long former Sen.
Bill Bradley can continue if he does not make a strong showing
against Vice President Al Gore there -LRB- presumably a victory , though
a near-victory has done the trick for candidates in the past -RRB- .

McCain and Bradley are both examples of the type of candidates
who have historically flourished in New Hampshire : slightly
insurgent and underfunded . But even if both should win there , the
calendar works against them pushing on to the nomination .

There are no Democratic primaries until March 7 , but there are
16 contests on that day , from New York to California . It is worse
for McCain . Before March 7 , he faces contests in South Carolina ,
Arizona and Michigan . That schedule could not be more problematic
for an underfunded candidate running outside of the establishment .
Nor could it be more accommodating for Bush , who spent much of last
year raising money to prepare himself precisely for this moment .

-LRB- MORE -RRB-

nn

UNDATED : this moment .

`` McCain and Bradley have had enormous breaks in this race _ and
it 's still uphill for them , '' said Charles E. Cook Jr. , the editor
of a Washington-based political report . `` They still have to thread
a needle . ''

Not only does the present primary system reduce the chance of an
outsider winning a nomination , it will likely force them out of the
race sooner , thus reducing the chance that they will help shape the
positions of their party or their nominee . This , in turn , may leave
their supporters feeling shut out of and disinterested in
participating in the political process .

The traditional view among party professionals is that the
system produces a good result for the party : an early nominee .
` It 's a bad thing to keep going : you 'd rather get it out of the
way , '' said James Carville , the consultant to President Clinton .
`` Find one fighter that likes to get hit . ''

As the primary season grows shorter each cycle , that
once-dominant view holds less and less sway . `` It 's bad for the
candidate because you do n't get the same feel for the country , ''
said Paul Begala , who worked with Carville in running Clinton 's
1992 campaign . `` I traveled with Bill Clinton to 48 states , by my
count . You learn a lot . You see a lot . ''

Less time campaigning also means less examination of a
candidates ' record , experience and past . And there are tactical
complications posed by becoming the candidate too early .

How does a candidate fill the long months between winning the
nomination and the summer convention ? How do they compete with the
Reform Party 's likely candidates , notably Donald Trump , who may
have the stage largely to himself in the spring ? How do the
campaigns hold on to the voters ' attention , or do they at all ?
Witness what happened with Bob Dole in 1996 , as he struggled to
distance himself from congressional Republicans pushing policies
that played against his own campaign interests .

Indeed , with few exceptions , no one is happy with the way the
system has evolved , and both the national Republican and Democratic
committees have set up commissions to examine how or if to change
it . `` If the front-loading does result in people believing they do
not play the role they would otherwise , we have to do something
about it , '' said Joe Andrew , the national Democratic chairman .

Richard Bond , the former national Republican chairman , offered a
more fundamental concern about the process . `` I 'm a gray-hair now ,
and the gray-hairs of the Republican Party think it 's better to
have a primary than not , '' Bond said . `` Because your guy gets
tested . A feverish contest that would resolve early enough is the
prescription for success . ''

UNDATED : this moment .

`` McCain and Bradley have had enormous breaks in this race _ and
it 's still uphill for them , '' said Charles E. Cook Jr. , the editor
of a Washington-based political report . `` They still have to thread
a needle . ''

Not only does the present primary system reduce the chance of an
outsider winning a nomination , it will likely force them out of the
race sooner , thus reducing the chance that they will help shape the
positions of their party or their nominee . This , in turn , may leave
their supporters feeling shut out of and disinterested in
participating in the political process .

The traditional view among party professionals is that the
system produces a good result for the party : an early nominee .
` It 's a bad thing to keep going : you 'd rather get it out of the
way , '' said James Carville , the consultant to President Clinton .
`` Find one fighter that likes to get hit . ''

As the primary season grows shorter each cycle , that
once-dominant view holds less and less sway . `` It 's bad for the
candidate because you do n't get the same feel for the country , ''
said Paul Begala , who worked with Carville in running Clinton 's
1992 campaign . `` I traveled with Bill Clinton to 48 states , by my
count . You learn a lot . You see a lot . ''

Less time campaigning also means less examination of a
candidates ' record , experience and past . And there are tactical
complications posed by becoming the candidate too early .

How does a candidate fill the long months between winning the
nomination and the summer convention ? How do they compete with the
Reform Party 's likely candidates , notably Donald Trump , who may
have the stage largely to himself in the spring ? How do the
campaigns hold on to the voters ' attention , or do they at all ?
Witness what happened with Bob Dole in 1996 , as he struggled to
distance himself from congressional Republicans pushing policies
that played against his own campaign interests .

Indeed , with few exceptions , no one is happy with the way the
system has evolved , and both the national Republican and Democratic
committees have set up commissions to examine how or if to change
it . `` If the front-loading does result in people believing they do
not play the role they would otherwise , we have to do something
about it , '' said Joe Andrew , the national Democratic chairman .

Richard Bond , the former national Republican chairman , offered a
more fundamental concern about the process . `` I 'm a gray-hair now ,
and the gray-hairs of the Republican Party think it 's better to
have a primary than not , '' Bond said . `` Because your guy gets
tested . A feverish contest that would resolve early enough is the
prescription for success . ''

HELMETS , ORIGAMI AND OTHER NOTES FROM THE UNDERGROUND

`` We choose freedom because it gives us the power to live ,
learn , and love , '' wrote students from Tanapag Elementary School in
the Northern Mariana Islands . Their essay , along with Ray Charles '
sunglasses , photos of Earth from space , a Twinkie , Corningware , a
computer chip , the Bill of Rights , a World War II helmet , a cell
phone and a piece of the Berlin Wall will be among the items sealed
this summer in the National Millennium Time Capsule until 2100 .

The time capsule prototype was unveiled Friday by President
Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton in Washington .

It is on display at the Smithsonian Institution 's National
Museum of American History . The prototype stands 4 feet high , 6
feet long , 2 feet deep , carved out of wood in an American flag
motif .

`` We developed 25 different designs , all shapes , '' said Jim
Biber , an architect from Pentagram who collaborated with Robert
Brunner , an industrial engineer , to design the piece . `` But the
flag was chosen because it is an obvious symbol of the nation . ''

The official chest will be fabricated in three metals . The white
strips will be formed in stainless steel , embodying America 's
industrial past ; the red strips will be formed in silicon bronze ,
symbolizing communication , and blue stars will be crafted out of
titanium , a metal with space-age properties , representing America 's
future .

The items were solicited by the White House Millennium Council
from almost 400 congressional and presidential medalists and 56
recipients of the National Teacher of the Year award . James Watson ,
director and president of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , submitted
a CD-ROM of the human genome project and said in his accompanying
written explanation that `` it will be biology 's most important gift
ever to human society , being the instruction book for human
development and functioning . ''

Dr. Henry Louis Gates , director of the W.E.B. Du Bois Institute
for Afro-American Research and W.E.B. Du Bois Professor of the
Humanities at Harvard , sent in another CD-ROM , titled Encarta
Africana . `` At the beginning of the twentieth century , '' he
explained , `` W.E.B. Du Bois announced that the most effective way
to fight anti-black racism would be the publication of a
comprehensive encyclopedia of the black world ... Ninety years
later , some 400 scholars finally banded together to produce this
encyclopedia . ''

The 85-letter Cherokee alphabet was submitted by Wilma
Mankiller , principal chief of the Cherokee Nation , a winner of the
Medal of Freedom . She called it `` the language that has survived on
this land since time immemorial . It is hope for the future that the
Cherokee language will still be spoken 100 or even 500 years from
now . ''

Playwright August Wilson suggested a recording by Bessie Smith
of `` Nobody in Town Can Bake a Sweet Jellyroll Like Mine '' because
the first time he heard the song , `` the universe stuttered and
everything fell to a new place ... It was a birth , a baptism , a
resurrection , and a redemption all rolled up into one ... The
ideas of self-determination , self-respect , and self-defense ...
are still very much a part of my life as I sit down and write ''

Richard Bell , executive director of Young Audiences , chose `` a
simple drawing or song created by a child . I believe this would
convey our commitment to future generations while at the same time
honoring the cultural legacy that sustains all Americans today . ''

The artistic director of the Steppenwolf Theatre Co. and Medal
of Arts winner Martha Lavey submitted `` Grapes of Wrath , '' saying :
`` This novel captures a profound and constitutive experience in the
composition of the American psyche and culture . This is a nation
defined by the courage and fortitude of a citizenship seeking a
better , fairer , and more generous life . ''

Actor Gregory Peck , among others , suggested `` a reel of a film
showing Neil Armstrong 's landing on the Moon . ''

The White House Millennium Council plans to use all the objects
submitted . The submissions , or replicas of large items , will
ultimately be placed in smaller stainless steel capsules that can
fit in compartments , and essays will be placed in the lower
drawers .

Former President Gerald R. Ford wrote : `` Amidst all that is new ,
however , may we never discard those ancient values _ courage and
compassion , integrity and reverence for things seen and unseen _
that have made America a historic refuge for the world 's oppressed .
Our fondest hope for the new millennium is that we realize the
promise , older than the republic itself , of a land without limits ,
as generous as it is inclusive . ''

More than 1,000 students taught by recipients of the national
teacher of the year award submitted individual and collective
statements .

Lynn Preacher 's fourth grade class in Oklahoma made an eagle out
of construction and origami paper , saying the eagle `` represents
our country and has many of the same traits of the U.S. . It is
smart , brave , mighty and stands for freedom ... In America we
have rights that people do not have in other countries , and we
should be thankful . ''

The council has not received all contributions , and will
continue to accept submissions until the official capsule is
completed . Until then , the prototype will remain on display at the
Smithsonian Institution 's National Museum of American History . The
actual time capsule is expected to be completed by early summer .
That capsule will be on display in the rotunda at the National
Archives until the end of the year , then be relocated to a more
secure , climate-controlled area for future generations , to open in
100 years .

HELMETS , ORIGAMI AND OTHER NOTES FROM THE UNDERGROUND

`` We choose freedom because it gives us the power to live ,
learn , and love , '' wrote students from Tanapag Elementary School in
the Northern Mariana Islands . Their essay , along with Ray Charles '
sunglasses , photos of Earth from space , a Twinkie , Corningware , a
computer chip , the Bill of Rights , a World War II helmet , a cell
phone and a piece of the Berlin Wall will be among the items sealed
this summer in the National Millennium Time Capsule until 2100 .

The time capsule prototype was unveiled Friday by President
Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton in Washington .

It is on display at the Smithsonian Institution 's National
Museum of American History . The prototype stands 4 feet high , 6
feet long , 2 feet deep , carved out of wood in an American flag
motif .

`` We developed 25 different designs , all shapes , '' said Jim
Biber , an architect from Pentagram who collaborated with Robert
Brunner , an industrial engineer , to design the piece . `` But the
flag was chosen because it is an obvious symbol of the nation . ''

The official chest will be fabricated in three metals . The white
strips will be formed in stainless steel , embodying America 's
industrial past ; the red strips will be formed in silicon bronze ,
symbolizing communication , and blue stars will be crafted out of
titanium , a metal with space-age properties , representing America 's
future .

The items were solicited by the White House Millennium Council
from almost 400 congressional and presidential medalists and 56
recipients of the National Teacher of the Year award . James Watson ,
director and president of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , submitted
a CD-ROM of the human genome project and said in his accompanying
written explanation that `` it will be biology 's most important gift
ever to human society , being the instruction book for human
development and functioning . ''

Dr. Henry Louis Gates , director of the W.E.B. Du Bois Institute
for Afro-American Research and W.E.B. Du Bois Professor of the
Humanities at Harvard , sent in another CD-ROM , titled Encarta
Africana . `` At the beginning of the twentieth century , '' he
explained , `` W.E.B. Du Bois announced that the most effective way
to fight anti-black racism would be the publication of a
comprehensive encyclopedia of the black world ... Ninety years
later , some 400 scholars finally banded together to produce this
encyclopedia . ''

The 85-letter Cherokee alphabet was submitted by Wilma
Mankiller , principal chief of the Cherokee Nation , a winner of the
Medal of Freedom . She called it `` the language that has survived on
this land since time immemorial . It is hope for the future that the
Cherokee language will still be spoken 100 or even 500 years from
now . ''

Playwright August Wilson suggested a recording by Bessie Smith
of `` Nobody in Town Can Bake a Sweet Jellyroll Like Mine '' because
the first time he heard the song , `` the universe stuttered and
everything fell to a new place ... It was a birth , a baptism , a
resurrection , and a redemption all rolled up into one ... The
ideas of self-determination , self-respect , and self-defense ...
are still very much a part of my life as I sit down and write ''

Richard Bell , executive director of Young Audiences , chose `` a
simple drawing or song created by a child . I believe this would
convey our commitment to future generations while at the same time
honoring the cultural legacy that sustains all Americans today . ''

The artistic director of the Steppenwolf Theatre Co. and Medal
of Arts winner Martha Lavey submitted `` Grapes of Wrath , '' saying :
`` This novel captures a profound and constitutive experience in the
composition of the American psyche and culture . This is a nation
defined by the courage and fortitude of a citizenship seeking a
better , fairer , and more generous life . ''

Actor Gregory Peck , among others , suggested `` a reel of a film
showing Neil Armstrong 's landing on the Moon . ''

The White House Millennium Council plans to use all the objects
submitted . The submissions , or replicas of large items , will
ultimately be placed in smaller stainless steel capsules that can
fit in compartments , and essays will be placed in the lower
drawers .

Former President Gerald R. Ford wrote : `` Amidst all that is new ,
however , may we never discard those ancient values _ courage and
compassion , integrity and reverence for things seen and unseen _
that have made America a historic refuge for the world 's oppressed .
Our fondest hope for the new millennium is that we realize the
promise , older than the republic itself , of a land without limits ,
as generous as it is inclusive . ''

More than 1,000 students taught by recipients of the national
teacher of the year award submitted individual and collective
statements .

Lynn Preacher 's fourth grade class in Oklahoma made an eagle out
of construction and origami paper , saying the eagle `` represents
our country and has many of the same traits of the U.S. . It is
smart , brave , mighty and stands for freedom ... In America we
have rights that people do not have in other countries , and we
should be thankful . ''

The council has not received all contributions , and will
continue to accept submissions until the official capsule is
completed . Until then , the prototype will remain on display at the
Smithsonian Institution 's National Museum of American History . The
actual time capsule is expected to be completed by early summer .
That capsule will be on display in the rotunda at the National
Archives until the end of the year , then be relocated to a more
secure , climate-controlled area for future generations , to open in
100 years .

PAKISTANI SERIAL KILLER SAID HE STOPPED AT 100 VICTIMS

The mass murderer had spent much of the past
month hiding in a drainage culvert and later a cave . He looked
haggard . His clothes were dirty and wrinkled and wet . He was
holding two satchels , one filled with eggs , the other with apples .

He introduced himself . `` I am Javed Iqbal , killer of 100 boys , ''
he told the receptionist in the lobby of the newspaper office .
`` Please tell someone in the reporting section that I have come to
surrender . ''

The receptionist recalls being unsure what to do . Was this
pathetic-looking man really Pakistan 's most notorious killer ? Or
merely some bothersome fool ?

The hour was late , just after 9 p.m. Deadlines were pressing .
Ten minutes passed before a reporter was finally summoned , and he
was staggered at the scoop . He invited Iqbal , scourge of this
entire nation , upstairs for questioning .

And that is how it came to an end Thursday , the frantic
month-long hunt for a vengeance-seeking confessed killer , a man who
enticed young teens _ most of them beggars and runaways _ to his
tiny apartment in historic Lahore . He fed them and entertained them
and asked their life stories and took their snapshots . Then he
suffocated them , later dissolving their bodies in large vats of
acid . He poured the residue in an alleyway sewer .

Iqbal , 38 , a wealthy , tormented man , kept an annotated list of
his deeds , with his victims ' names and ages and the dates of their
deaths . He kept piles of clothing and shoes taken from his victims .
When , by his count , he had killed 100 , he stopped .

`` I could have killed 500 , this was not a problem , money was not
a problem , '' he told reporters and editors in a small office as
they recorded his words . `` But the pledge I had taken was of 100
children , and I never wanted to violate this . ''

The `` pledge , '' he said , was an act of revenge against the
police . He repeated a story that he had written in an earlier
confessional , of how two young servants had beaten him up badly
last year , of how the police had ignored his complaints and instead
accused him of sodomy , something he had been charged with before .

He decided that the killing of children would be his means of
retribution . `` In this way , I would take revenge from the world I
hated , '' he said of his 6-month homicidal binge . `` My mother cried
for me . I wanted 100 mothers to cry for their children . ''

He succeeded .

Early in December , as news of the crimes became public , parents
lined up by the thousands to rummage through huge piles of rumpled
clothes and old shoes that had been found in Iqbal 's apartment .
Some found items that belonged to their missing sons . Others merely
saw their children 's photos spread across wobbly wooden tables at
the police station . Or they read the morbid details in Iqbal 's
diaries . Parental grief became a daily spectacle as more and more
people complained : `` Why ca n't the police find the killer ? ''

Criticism of the police has been immense , with riots in Lahore .

In late November , Iqbal actually turned himself in to a
policeman who ignored his confession as a fantasy . The murderer
then sent his incriminating diary and photos to The Jang newspaper ,
whose reporters , on Dec. 2 , were the first to search his apartment
and find evidence of the crimes . By then , Iqbal was a fugitive ,
though notes he left behind indicated that he intended to drown
himself .

He surrendered on Thursday at the three-story offices shared by
The Jang , an Urdu-language publication , and its sister paper , The
News , which is written in English .

At Iqbal 's request , the army was called to take him into custody
rather than the police . At the time , the police announcing that
they had arrested two men suspected of being Iqbal 's accomplices .
The two , Muhammad Shahzad and Muhammad Nadeem , were caught trying
to cash a traveler 's check in Iqbal 's name . They admitted that they
were helping the killer hide out in the culvert and the cave ,
police said .

Iqbal , who lived off the funds from the sale of a family
business , contends that he was helped in the slayings by various
confederates , including one who has already died in police custody .
Thursday , Iqbal said that many of the victims were made to inhale a
mixture of cyanide and acid as they slept .

`` I myself wore a mask , and after about five breaths , the
sleeping victim would be dead , '' he said . `` Then my friends would
place the body in a container and later drain it away . ''

According to The Jang and The News , Iqbal was unrepentant as he
told his story . He was calm as he was led away . `` I am a relieved
man today , '' he said , even as he acknowledged that his fate is
likely to be the gallows .

He reflected on his actions as heroic , something in the
long-term public interest . He remarked how easy it was to dispose
of the bodies of his victims in the large vats of acid . Such easily
abused chemicals are a great danger to society , Iqbal said .

`` What if terrorists learned of these things , '' the mass
murderer fretted .

NOMINEES MAY BE CHOSEN QUICKLY IN PRIMARY SEASON

Only 22 days until the first votes are cast in Iowa , the
chairmen of the Republican and Democratic parties say they are
bracing for a presidential primary season that is so competitive _
and unexpectedly so _ that they have to reach back 40 years to come
up with a comparison .

Yet the entire exercise may be over soon after the public begins
to pay attention . This will be the speediest _ critics say hastiest
_ dash to the nomination ever , because several states , seeking
greater political sway , elbowed their way in by moving up the dates
of their contests .

The rejiggered calendar means the races will go off like a
string of firecrackers , beginning with the caucuses in Iowa on Jan.
24 and the New Hampshire primary on Feb. 1 , followed by primaries
in the electoral giants of California , New York and several other
states on March 7 .

After a six-week rush of voting _ less than half the National
Football League 's regular season schedule _ the nominees to be the
leader of the free world may well be apparent .

As recently as last summer , advisers to the two front-runners ,
Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas , expressed
few qualms about the truncated schedule . They were so immersed in
constructing what they viewed as organizational juggernauts that
they did not seem particularly alert to threats from within their
ranks . And they anticipated wrapping up their nominations quickly
and tidily so they could turn to the general election .

Instead they now have no choice but to strategize over how the
outcome of one contest could affect the next one .

Bush and Gore are still the favorites ; they may well face each
other in November 2000 . But now , in an unaccustomed position for
the leading contenders , they are playing catch-up , at least in the
high-profile state of New Hampshire , where polls show that both
contests are too close to call . Gore must contend with an
unanticipated , and threatening , challenge from former Sen. Bill
Bradley of New Jersey , and Bush faces one from Sen. John McCain of
Arizona .

While Gore and Bush are comfortably ahead in national surveys ,
their challengers hope that those campaigns become unglued in New
Hampshire _ and never recover . Adding to their credibility , and
political muscle , Bradley and McCain made striking gains in fund
raising near the end of 1999 .

`` It 's going to be an unbelievable six weeks , '' said Ed Rendell ,
general chairman of the Democratic National Committee . `` On our
side , you might see ups and downs and twists and turns in an
eight-day period . You will think one of the candidates has the
upper hand and _ bingo ! _ he loses the next week . ''

Recalling the presidential campaign of 1960 , Rendell , who
retires Monday as mayor of Philadelphia , said , `` You 've got to go
back to Kennedy and Johnson to find two co-equals who are really
battling head to head . And I do n't recall the last primary campaign
when we 've had two candidates who are so well known and so well
funded . '' But the truth is , Lyndon B. Johnson was never considered
as much a threat to John F. Kennedy as Bradley is now to Gore .

Jim Nicholson , chairman of the Republican National Committee ,
also said this year 's campaign reminded him of the high stakes on
both sides in 1960 . Even so , Richard M. Nixon never came close to
losing the nomination to Nelson Rockefeller or other rivals , who
were not considered as potent as McCain is this year .

`` If you want to include both parties in the calculus , this
might be the most competitive situation since 1960 , '' Nicholson
said . `` There 's a lot at stake and it 's just going to get more
intense . ''

Asked to handicap the Republican race , Nicholson , in unusually
candid comments for a party chairman , all but brushed off four
contenders . `` Bush is clearly the front-runner in terms of money , ''
he said . `` But Senator McCain is a great candidate who has shown
real skill at retail campaigning in New Hampshire and is a very
authentic American hero . So anything can happen in this thing . ''

Nicholson hastened to add that the potential of Steve Forbes ,
with millions from his family fortune at his disposal , should not
be disregarded .

After a prelude to 2000 that was hardly sedate _ candidates
piled up millions of dollars in donations and traded jabs
throughout the year _ the contenders are about to enter the most
frenzied , and possibly ferocious , stretch thus far . This week ,
candidates will practically move to Iowa and New Hampshire . They
have accelerated their deluge of 30-second television commercials .

And the schedule of successive debates might hearten even
advocates of good government : Democrats will face off in New
Hampshire on Wednesday , followed by Republicans there on Thursday ,
Republicans in South Carolina on Friday , and Democrats in Iowa on
Saturday . That accounts for just this week .

`` They stick their signs everywhere , '' said Ted Bailey ,
describing how politicking _ and cold weather _ have overtaken
Chichester , N.H. , where he is a selectman . `` But they 're going to
find it hard sticking signs in now , because the ground 's frozen . ''

The major contenders are also keeping an eye just off center
stage , where a drama is unfolding over who will carry the mantle of
Ross Perot and the Reform Party he founded .

While Pat Buchanan , the conservative commentator , and Donald
Trump , the real estate tycoon , are campaigning most aggressively
and organizing in several states , other possible contenders include
Gov. Jesse Ventura of Minnesota . And few are counting out a
surprise re-emergence of Perot himself .

-LRB- STORY CAN END HERE _ OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS -RRB-

-LRB- MORE -RRB-

nn

UNDATED : Perot himself .

The significance of the 2000 campaign reaches far beyond the
White House . It is no exaggeration to say that all three branches
of government are at stake . Democrats need a net gain of only six
seats to retake control of the House . It is far less likely that
Republicans will lose the Senate , although Democrats could pick up
seats . And because of expected retirements , the next president may
well fill between three and five vacancies on the Supreme Court .

And the election of state legislators in November is critically
important . Nearly two dozen legislative chambers are so evenly
divided that either party could win control of them . But those
legislators , along with the governors , will use results of the 2000
census to redraw boundaries of districts of congressional
candidates in 2002 and the four subsequent elections . The process
could affect who controls the House of Representatives for years .

Still , with the exception , perhaps , of the expected high-octane
match between Hillary Rodham Clinton and New York Mayor Rudolph
Giuliani for a Senate seat from New York , the presidential
competition is certain to command the most interest .

`` Probably in March of last year I thought , ` I bet I do n't get
very worked up about this , '' ' said Tom Brokaw , anchor of the NBC
Nightly News , who expects that his program will soon begin
broadcasting campaign stories every day . `` But people are slowly
awakening that there 's a real race going on here . McCain and
Bradley have opened the door to a lot of public interest . ''

In fact , one explanation for the allure of the McCain and
Bradley insurgencies is that some journalists , as well as ordinary
voters , seem charmed by them personally _ and have a hankering for
some drama .

Despite the ferment in New Hampshire , history is on the side of
Gore and Bush . Gore 's advisers reel off their institutional
advantages _ from the power of the White House to committed
delegates to endorsements from labor groups to important elected
officials _ that have dragged their predecessors across the finish
line .

Karl Rove , the mastermind of the Bush operation , recites the
history like a mantra . `` No Republican candidate who has led by
double digits in August of the Gallup Poll the year before the
election has failed to win the nomination , '' he explained . `` If
history is the guide , Bush stands a very good chance of being the
Republican nominee for president . ''

But this is no ordinary presidential year . No one knows how the
short-circuited season will alter the dynamic and , ultimately ,
affect who comes out on top .

Most strategists on both sides agree that Bradley has a better
chance of toppling Gore than McCain does of snatching the
nomination from Bush , because the Democrats are evenly matched
financially . In addition , while McCain is concentrating his
resources in New Hampshire , Bradley has assembled a national
organization .

This much seems clear : The New Hampshire primary is a
make-or-break battle for McCain and Bradley . That is where they
have made the most impressive showings . And they are each counting
on wins there to energize their candidacies _ and to demonstrate
that Gore and Bush are not invincible .

`` If McCain wins there , I 'm not sure he 's very well poised to
convert that into a national campaign , '' said William Mayer , a
political scientist at Northeastern University in Boston .
`` Bradley 's better positioned to do that . He 's managed to stay
pretty even with Gore in fund raising . ''

Because of the high expectations in the Granite State , Bradley
and McCain no longer have the luxury of sneaking up on the
front-runner _ as Gary Hart did against Walter Mondale in 1984 .

After their charmed campaigns in 1999 , Bradley and McCain are
certain to face tougher scrutiny in coming weeks from their
opponents and from the news media . And a loss in New Hampshire
could be devastating to either politician , not only because of
expectations but because their opponents have established
`` firewalls '' with potent organizations in several of the
subsequent primary states .

But the Bradley and McCain camps contend that if they win New
Hampshire , the excitement and momentum after those triumphs would
allow them to trump the institutional advantages of Bush and Gore .
After New Hampshire , Republicans have showdowns in South Carolina
on Feb. 19 and Arizona and Michigan on Feb. 22 before the
multistate voting on March 7 . But the Democrats will have a
five-week breather between New Hampshire and the March 7 contests .

Former Sen. Warren Rudman , R-N.H. , who backs McCain , said his
candidate and Bradley are poised to do well with independent voters
in his state . And victories there , he said , could make them
unstoppable .

`` I ca n't remember when you had it on both sides like this , ''
Rudman said . `` Bradley and McCain are both going to take huge
chunks of independent voters . '' Arguing that McCain has potential
for far more than prevailing in New Hampshire , he added , `` People
are whistling through the cemetery if they think that 's going to be
the end of it . ''

-LRB- MORE -RRB-

nn

UNDATED : of it . ''

The state of the race is far less settled than on the eve of the
primaries four years ago , when President Clinton faced no
opposition and Bob Dole towered over the field . Dole was bruised
and battered more than he expected , but still managed to crush his
rivals .

Despite the emergence of McCain , the most striking aspect of the
2000 campaign has been Bush 's success . Though he was twice elected
governor of Texas , Bush had no national political seasoning and
popped up virtually out of nowhere to amass a staggering ,
record-breaking war chest of over $ 67 million . He captured the
early support of far more Republican members of Congress , governors
and conservative leaders than Dole did at this point in the 1996
race .

And his political might forced half the Republican field out of
the race , including former Vice President Dan Quayle , Elizabeth
Dole , Rep. John Kasich of Ohio and former Gov. Lamar Alexander of
Tennessee . The only ones left standing are McCain ; Forbes ; Sen.
Orrin Hatch of Utah ; Alan Keyes , a former State Department
official ; and Gary Bauer , the former head of the Family Research
Council .

The outpouring for the Texas governor has offended some
Republicans who think it appears that he is being crowned . Craig
Grimes , a foreman for a power company in Youngstown , Ohio , who
responded to a New York Times/CBS News Poll , said he was taken
aback by how Rush Limbaugh and Republican luminaries defend Bush .

`` It 's like a football game , and they 're all running ahead and
clearing the way , running interference and blocking for Bush , ''
said Grimes . `` They 've poured the money into him . And it scares me
because he 's going to owe big time whoever it is who is pushing
him . ''

The challenge , now , for Bush is to meet the high expectations he
helped create for himself by actually winning some elections . He
also needs to overcome an image from debates in December that he is
not as versed in the issues or as nimble on his feet as some
Republicans had hoped .

And while Republicans enjoy a tradition of nominating their
front-runner , Bush has less national campaign experience than any
Republican nominee since Dwight D. Eisenhower , who was elected
president in 1952 .

Gore had a far rockier year than Bush . That was especially
apparent because he was confronted only by one rival and had
expected to glide to the nomination unimpeded . Instead , Bradley
showed such political potency last year that he forced the vice
president to practically reinvent his campaign and shed many
trappings of incumbency .

`` Had Gore not altered the terrain in September , he 'd be gone by
now , '' said Sen. Joseph Biden , D-Del . who has not endorsed either
candidate . `` He was on such a slide through the summer . But he 's
righted the ship . ''

The two Democrats seem to agree on the leading issues _ health
care , education , Social Security and campaign finance reform _ but
they have argued vehemently over the details . The Republicans , by
contrast , have been wrangling over a different set of issues ,
namely tax cuts , foreign policy and social issues like abortion .

Yet perhaps because no single burning issue seems to have
grabbed the electorate , the candidates are devoting much time to
talking about themselves as human beings , from their upbringings to
their decisions to enter politics . They are also trying , perhaps ,
to set themselves on a higher moral plane than Clinton .

`` I ca n't name issues that excite the public , so we have to
create issues , like health care , '' said Gerald Gamm , chairman of
the political science department at the University of Rochester .
`` When the economy is in the midst of its most robust economic
expansion in most of our lifetimes , when the nation , economically ,
is on top of the world , voters are n't paying attention to issues .
So what is new now is that candidates are being aggressive in
marketing their private lives . ''

But the biggest concern of the party chairmen is not the choice
of issues , but the amount of time candidates will have to discuss
them .

`` This is a crazy way to determine the nominees of the parties ,
because there 's really no time for almost anyone to have a cogent
debate , '' said Rendell , the Democratic chairman . `` It just lends
itself to those god-awful 30-second ads . ''

ELECTION YEAR REVEALS WHAT NEEDS FIXING IN U.S. POLITICAL SYSTEM

The United States enters its 54th presidential
election year in a period of remarkable calm and great economic
prosperity , with dozens of other nations struggling to adapt
American political forms . Yet the American people question their
political system on one front after another .

Some of the challenges are overt . Former Sen. Bill Bradley , who
like Sen. John McCain has made condemning the campaign finance
system a major element of his presidential bid , says `` democracy is
a broken thermostat '' because of big contributions . Meanwhile , the
Reform Party squabbles but still stands as evidence that millions
of Americans reject the traditional structure .

But the most telling condemnation is passive . A majority -LRB- 51
percent -RRB- of voting-age Americans chose not to vote in 1996 , and 64
percent did not vote in 1998 . Curtis Gans , an expert on voter
turnout , says that more than half the children in America live in
households where neither parent votes . Huge majorities tell
pollsters they are not paying attention to this year 's campaign .

Similarly , it is getting harder to recruit able candidates to
run for office at a time of insatiable news media scrutiny and
incessant demands of fund raising . And savvy veterans drop out at a
high rate , especially from the moderate centers of the two parties .

These more fundamental questions and concerns about the way the
system works are generally shelved , or used themselves as fodder to
appeal to voters , as politicians and the press focus on the
nomination contests and the chances of Republicans capturing the
presidency or Democrats taking the House . The issues have been
building for decades , but come into special focus in 2000 , after
the first presidential election since 1924 when a majority did not
vote .

The obstacles to participation have been thrown up by the
`` system '' _ of politicians , consultants , interest groups and the
press _ just when legal barriers to registration and voting have
disappeared .

Some of the obstacles come from deliberate decisions . Some
television advertisements are really intended to drive down
turnout . Both parties have become highly skilled at drawing the
boundaries of congressional and legislative districts so that few
seats will be truly competitive . That preserves the careers of
incumbents .

One way of looking at these trends was offered by Theda Skocpol ,
professor of government and sociology at Harvard . Ms. Skocpol says
politicians use the information age to locate and `` compete over a
very narrow slice of swing voters . ''

At the same time , what she calls `` an oligarchy '' of interests
uses expertise , lobbyists and campaign contributions to achieve its
ends with government , `` rather than by mobilizing large numbers of
their fellow citizens into a competitive electoral force . ''

Some of the old ways of involving citizens have died out , as
politicians get their messages out through television and direct
mail . Door-to-door canvassing does live on in Iowa and New
Hampshire , but almost as museum pieces .

Anne Wexler , an antiwar advocate in the 1960s and a Carter aide
in the '70s who runs a public relations firm here , observed that in
the nation 's capital , where people do care about politics , neither
Bradley , Gov. George W. Bush of Texas nor Vice President Al Gore
has a headquarters where an interested citizen could volunteer to ,
say , stuff envelopes . Writing a check is the only participation
welcomed .

But even more serious may be the way the system is portrayed _
fairly and unfairly , by itself and by the news media .

Any veteran observer of Congress , for example , would say that
the typical member today is better educated and harder-working than
whoever held the seat 35 years ago , and at the same time less
likely to be a drunk or a womanizer , or to take bribes . Yet
consumers of a press that rarely covered those weaknesses before
and covers them now as regular matters have an opposite set of
impressions .

Gans , who heads the Committee for the Study of the American
Electorate , blames consultants for `` the conduct of campaigns ,
especially at the end , in 30-second attack ads that vilify all the
candidates and create a miasma over the political system and invite
people not to vote for particular candidates and not to vote at
all . ''

John C. Danforth , who retired as a senator from Missouri after
18 years in 1994 to practice law in St. Louis , and insists he did
not `` go away mad , '' says he is struck by how much Congress now
seems to be wholly involved in `` partisan combat , '' not
legislating .

Danforth speculated that an influx of Republicans who had been
`` treated like dogs '' by House Democrats led to the change , as they
saw a chance to get even and scorned `` anyone who tried to do
anything on a bipartisan basis , '' like his late Republican
colleague , John H. Chafee of Rhode Island .

The bitter partisan tone in Washington not only discourages
potential congressional candidates who may be used to amiable state
legislatures , it turns off voters , too .

-LRB- BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB-

That effect was sketched by a knowledgeable ex-Washingtonian ,
Nancy Sinnott Dwight . In the early 1980s , Mrs. Dwight ran the
National Republican Congressional Committee here . Then she married
and moved to Lyme , N.H. , where every four years she gets a lot of
politics to watch .

As she hears candidates , she is struck by this year 's supply of
`` terrific ideas . '' But she says that the atmosphere in Washington
leads voters to brush off these ideas because they think there is
`` too much paralysis . ''

`` The system ca n't seem to get things done , '' Mrs. Dwight said .
A voter can download a good idea off the Web , she said , but does
not believe a candidate can make it happen in Washington .

No examination of the last session of Congress , for example ,
would challenge those doubts .

-LRB- END OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB-

-LRB- MORE -RRB-

nn

WASHINGTON : those doubts .

But Gans is not alone in his worry that the news media often
make things look worse than they are , either covering things
cynically or not at all .

For four decades , after all , the political observers with the
biggest audiences _ first Johnny Carson and then Jay Leno and David
Letterman _ have offered uninterrupted cynical criticism of every
president and every member of Congress anyone ever heard of , from
Lyndon Johnson to Edward M. Kennedy to Newt Gingrich .

Joel Silbey , professor of history at Cornell , said the
combination of news and talk had created `` a culture of criticism ''
that portrayed government as a continual failure .

Even the revered Walter Cronkite , Silbey said , played a role .
When Cronkite signed off news broadcasts by saying , for example ,
`` And that 's the way it is , Friday , March 28 , 1980 _ the 146th day
of captivity for the Americans in Iran , '' Silbey said the anchorman
was saying that on that day , again , the American government was
powerless .

Jon Margolis , a retired Chicago Tribune political columnist ,
said he thought the problem became severe in the mid-1980s , when
politics began to be covered by `` younger people who did n't like
politicians and did not like politics '' and were disappointed that
it was not entertaining .

The news media are often attacked , especially by academics , for
paying too much attention to who is ahead and too little to issues .
Nelson Polsby , professor of government at the University of
California at Berkeley , goes a step further . Polsby says the press
and television engage in `` the manufacture of a horse race . '' He
calls the news media just another interest group , `` attempting to
make their product interesting . ''

That kind of attention , he said , exaggerated the challenges to
Bob Dole in 1996 by implying that Steve Forbes and Pat Buchanan
should be taken seriously as potential presidents `` and basically
made Bob Dole spend all his money , '' weakening him for the race
against President Clinton .

There are some modest hopes . Kathleen Kennedy Townsend , the
lieutenant governor of Maryland , said that from observing the way
her own children used the Internet and the way it was used in Jesse
Ventura 's Reform Party victory in Minnesota , she believed it would
increase political involvement .

`` It 's immediate , '' she said . `` It 's not just television talking
at you , but you participate . ''

-LRB- BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB-

At another level , Mrs. Dwight said that in her part of New
Hampshire , people were actively involved in the problems that
mattered most to them , working hard as volunteers for their
churches and schools .

Silbey said that in Ithaca many of the people most active in
urging policies on local government were nonvoters , preferring to
influence through confrontation .

Gans dismisses those impressions as idiosyncratic , insisting
that national polling data shows that `` if people do n't vote , they
tend not to participate in any other societal activity . ''

`` By and large , '' he said , `` they are disengaged from society . ''

-LRB- END OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB-

Not everybody interviewed _ a group whose common threads are
knowledge of politics and little or no direct involvement in the
2000 elections _ was that bothered by nonvoting . Richard Norton
Smith , a biographer and former Republican speechwriter who heads
the Gerald R. Ford Library , said , `` I do n't think you condemn the
system if people do n't choose to involve themselves in it . ''

If the nation truly has only a 12-second attention span , he
said , that may be the fault not of the candidates or consultants ,
but of whoever invented the television remote control _ and of the
people themselves .

It is the American people , he said , `` who tell pollsters they
are offended by negative ads , '' and then elect the candidate who
uses them .

`` We have no one to blame but ourselves , '' he said . `` In the
end , democracy is all about standing in front of the mirror . ''

SLAUGHTER IN AFRICA : NOT AS SIMPLE AS ANCIENT HATREDS

Distrust of ethnic strangers runs so deep in
Burundi that there is a special insult _ `` ikimenabanga '' _ for the
person within a group who says too much , the one who breaks the
secret . It is safer to stay quiet , to keep to one 's own kind .

But there is a great distance between that kind of simple
suspicion and the hatreds that seem to have exploded in the last
decade with relentless regularity in Burundi , Rwanda and eastern
Congo _ the Great Lakes area of Africa . Documented genocide
occurred there in 1994 , when Hutu extremists in Rwanda meticulously
slaughtered at least half a million ethnic Tutsi . The fighting
continued in the form of a rebellion within Rwanda and spilled into
Congo _ then known as Zaire _ helping to shatter that country in
1997 . Burundi has been rent by civil warfare that started in 1993 .

Today , Hutu fighters who fled Rwanda in 1994 are preying there
again , in a war that has dragged in at least eight other nations .
And in Burundi , Rwanda 's southern twin , the Tutsi elite who rule
the country have herded into hillside camps 350,000 people , most of
them Hutu farmers , to separate them from Hutu guerrillas .

All of this fighting makes Africa 's Great Lakes region one of
the most grim and complicated places on earth , one where
well-intentioned outsiders periodically wonder whether , and how ,
they might step in to halt the violence . Each time , the question
comes down to this : Are these spasms of killing the result of old
hatreds , or are they grotesque products of political manipulation ?

To many outsiders `` ancient tribal hatreds '' has been the
formula easiest to accept , since it lends a patina of logic to
indifference _ to saying that there is little that outsiders could
do , even if they were willing . That is a position that underlay the
outside world 's inaction during the 1994 genocide in Rwanda .

But that is not what most experts on Africa say . The hatreds are
real , the experts say , but they are not ancient at all _ and are
not really different from ethnic conflicts anywhere else .

In broad outline , the conflicts in Africa are quite like those
in the Balkans : Ancient divisions , even animosities , exist , but it
takes a political elite to seize on them and transform them into
something far more violent as politicians seek power for
themselves .

`` It certainly is not ancient ethnic or tribal hatred , '' said
Filip Reyntjens , a professor at the Universities of Antwerp and
Leuven and a leading scholar of the Great Lakes region . `` That is a
vision many Europeans and North Americans have because it is an
easy way to explain what happens in Africa . ''

Scholars generally agree on the ethnic shape of the Great Lakes
before the colonists _ first Germans , then Belgians _ arrived in
the late 19th century . There were three distinct groups of people :
the Hutu , who tended to be farmers -LRB- more than 80 percent today -RRB- ;
the Tutsi , who arrived on the land later as nomads and tended to
raise cattle -LRB- about 15 percent -RRB- ; and the Twa , or pygmies -LRB- perhaps 1
percent -RRB- . There were rivalries , even animosities , but none of the
episodes of ethnic killing that have scarred the recent past .

Except for the Twa _ who were truly discriminated against _ the
lines between Hutu and Tutsi were not always firm . The monarchies
in pre-colonial Rwanda and Burundi were led by Tutsi but high court
officials were often Hutu . Intermarriage was common , even if there
were tensions between ruler and ruled .

Along came the European colonists , who imposed their own ideas
about race and superiority , and tended to put one group officially
in power over the others . They preferred the Tutsi , who were viewed
as taller , thinner , smarter -LRB- and thus more like the Europeans -RRB- .

`` The Batutsi were meant to reign , '' wrote one Belgian
administrator in the 1920 's , according to the French author Gerard
Prunier in his authoritative book on the genocide , `` The Rwanda
Crisis '' -LRB- Columbia University Press , 1995 -RRB- . `` Their fine presence is
in itself enough to give them a great prestige vis-a-vis the
inferior races which surround . It is not surprising that those good
Bahutu , less intelligent , more simple , more spontaneous , more
trusting , have let themselves be enslaved without ever daring to
revolt . ''

What the colonists did , said Alison Des Forges , a historian and
consultant for Human Rights Watch , `` was take this system that was
relatively fluid and turned it into something very rigid and
hierarchical . ''

B Y the time the Belgians were preparing to withdraw from Rwanda
and Burundi in the late 1950s , many experts argue , the lines
between Hutu and Tutsi were firmly drawn , and resentment among the
Hutu was strong .

First , in Rwanda , Hutu clamoring for power killed many Tutsi in
1959 ; partly in response , the Tutsi elite in Burundi hardened their
control . -LRB- The Rwanda fighting also created a group of Tutsi exiles
whose children would become the guerrillas who took control in
1994 . -RRB- In Burundi , a unifying figure , Prince Louis Rwagasore , arose
among the Tutsi but was assassinated in 1961 .

-LRB- MORE -RRB-

nn

SLAUGHTER IN AFRICA : NOT AS SIMPLE AS ANCIENT HATREDS

Distrust of ethnic strangers runs so deep in
Burundi that there is a special insult _ `` ikimenabanga '' _ for the
person within a group who says too much , the one who breaks the
secret . It is safer to stay quiet , to keep to one 's own kind .

But there is a great distance between that kind of simple
suspicion and the hatreds that seem to have exploded in the last
decade with relentless regularity in Burundi , Rwanda and eastern
Congo _ the Great Lakes area of Africa . Documented genocide
occurred there in 1994 , when Hutu extremists in Rwanda meticulously
slaughtered at least half a million ethnic Tutsi . The fighting
continued in the form of a rebellion within Rwanda and spilled into
Congo _ then known as Zaire _ helping to shatter that country in
1997 . Burundi has been rent by civil warfare that started in 1993 .

Today , Hutu fighters who fled Rwanda in 1994 are preying there
again , in a war that has dragged in at least eight other nations .
And in Burundi , Rwanda 's southern twin , the Tutsi elite who rule
the country have herded into hillside camps 350,000 people , most of
them Hutu farmers , to separate them from Hutu guerrillas .

All of this fighting makes Africa 's Great Lakes region one of
the most grim and complicated places on earth , one where
well-intentioned outsiders periodically wonder whether , and how ,
they might step in to halt the violence . Each time , the question
comes down to this : Are these spasms of killing the result of old
hatreds , or are they grotesque products of political manipulation ?

To many outsiders `` ancient tribal hatreds '' has been the
formula easiest to accept , since it lends a patina of logic to
indifference _ to saying that there is little that outsiders could
do , even if they were willing . That is a position that underlay the
outside world 's inaction during the 1994 genocide in Rwanda .

But that is not what most experts on Africa say . The hatreds are
real , the experts say , but they are not ancient at all _ and are
not really different from ethnic conflicts anywhere else .

In broad outline , the conflicts in Africa are quite like those
in the Balkans : Ancient divisions , even animosities , exist , but it
takes a political elite to seize on them and transform them into
something far more violent as politicians seek power for
themselves .

`` It certainly is not ancient ethnic or tribal hatred , '' said
Filip Reyntjens , a professor at the Universities of Antwerp and
Leuven and a leading scholar of the Great Lakes region . `` That is a
vision many Europeans and North Americans have because it is an
easy way to explain what happens in Africa . ''

Scholars generally agree on the ethnic shape of the Great Lakes
before the colonists _ first Germans , then Belgians _ arrived in
the late 19th century . There were three distinct groups of people :
the Hutu , who tended to be farmers -LRB- more than 80 percent today -RRB- ;
the Tutsi , who arrived on the land later as nomads and tended to
raise cattle -LRB- about 15 percent -RRB- ; and the Twa , or pygmies -LRB- perhaps 1
percent -RRB- . There were rivalries , even animosities , but none of the
episodes of ethnic killing that have scarred the recent past .

Except for the Twa _ who were truly discriminated against _ the
lines between Hutu and Tutsi were not always firm . The monarchies
in pre-colonial Rwanda and Burundi were led by Tutsi but high court
officials were often Hutu . Intermarriage was common , even if there
were tensions between ruler and ruled .

Along came the European colonists , who imposed their own ideas
about race and superiority , and tended to put one group officially
in power over the others . They preferred the Tutsi , who were viewed
as taller , thinner , smarter -LRB- and thus more like the Europeans -RRB- .

`` The Batutsi were meant to reign , '' wrote one Belgian
administrator in the 1920 's , according to the French author Gerard
Prunier in his authoritative book on the genocide , `` The Rwanda
Crisis '' -LRB- Columbia University Press , 1995 -RRB- . `` Their fine presence is
in itself enough to give them a great prestige vis-a-vis the
inferior races which surround . It is not surprising that those good
Bahutu , less intelligent , more simple , more spontaneous , more
trusting , have let themselves be enslaved without ever daring to
revolt . ''

What the colonists did , said Alison Des Forges , a historian and
consultant for Human Rights Watch , `` was take this system that was
relatively fluid and turned it into something very rigid and
hierarchical . ''

B Y the time the Belgians were preparing to withdraw from Rwanda
and Burundi in the late 1950s , many experts argue , the lines
between Hutu and Tutsi were firmly drawn , and resentment among the
Hutu was strong .

First , in Rwanda , Hutu clamoring for power killed many Tutsi in
1959 ; partly in response , the Tutsi elite in Burundi hardened their
control . -LRB- The Rwanda fighting also created a group of Tutsi exiles
whose children would become the guerrillas who took control in
1994 . -RRB- In Burundi , a unifying figure , Prince Louis Rwagasore , arose
among the Tutsi but was assassinated in 1961 .

-LRB- MORE -RRB-

nn

NAIROBI : in 1961 .

After independence came to both nations in 1962 , the
polarization in both only increased with round after round of
ethnic slaughters . People were killed merely for belonging to one
ethnic group or the other , something that had never happened in
either country .

In Rwanda , that cycle came to a crisis under the presidency of
Juvenal Habyarimana , a Hutu whose administration demonized all
Tutsi as supporters of rebels fighting to oust him . His death in a
plane crash in April 1994 , in which the Burundian president also
died , set off the 100 days of slaughter of Tutsis .

Now the problems continue with the war in Congo and the
seemingly intractable battles between the Hutu rebels and Tutsi
leadership in Burundi . There is not a great deal of hope among most
experts that the problems will be settled soon .

`` It seems to me that we are now in a situation where fear has
become the most powerful spur to violence , '' Ms. Des Forges said .

Still , these experts believe there is room for the outside world
to become engaged . The ideal for beginning to rebuild trust , Ms.
Des Forges said , is that outside nations find a way to guarantee
that there will be no more ethnic slaughters in either country For
Rwanda , she added , the international community could show
evenhandedness not only by continuing to bring the Hutu killers to
justice but by not ignoring abuses committed by the Tutsi leaders .

In Burundi , Jan van Eck , a consultant with the Center for
Conflict Resolution in Cape Town , said that each party must have a
place at the negotiating table _ an approach that seems to have
been adopted by the new mediator to the conflict , Nelson Mandela ,
who has some experience as a uniting force in his own country ,
South Africa .

Oddly , van Eck pointed out , the amount of blood already spilled
may at this point become an argument for ending the violence . In
Burundi , for example , so many people have blood on their hands _
Hutu and Tutsi alike _ that their own mutually awful pasts may
offer an opening for starting anew . `` They always said : Hang all
the people who committed crimes , or shoot them , '' van Eck said .
`` But now there is a realization that there might be too many . ''

NAIROBI : in 1961 .

After independence came to both nations in 1962 , the
polarization in both only increased with round after round of
ethnic slaughters . People were killed merely for belonging to one
ethnic group or the other , something that had never happened in
either country .

In Rwanda , that cycle came to a crisis under the presidency of
Juvenal Habyarimana , a Hutu whose administration demonized all
Tutsi as supporters of rebels fighting to oust him . His death in a
plane crash in April 1994 , in which the Burundian president also
died , set off the 100 days of slaughter of Tutsis .

Now the problems continue with the war in Congo and the
seemingly intractable battles between the Hutu rebels and Tutsi
leadership in Burundi . There is not a great deal of hope among most
experts that the problems will be settled soon .

`` It seems to me that we are now in a situation where fear has
become the most powerful spur to violence , '' Ms. Des Forges said .

Still , these experts believe there is room for the outside world
to become engaged . The ideal for beginning to rebuild trust , Ms.
Des Forges said , is that outside nations find a way to guarantee
that there will be no more ethnic slaughters in either country For
Rwanda , she added , the international community could show
evenhandedness not only by continuing to bring the Hutu killers to
justice but by not ignoring abuses committed by the Tutsi leaders .

In Burundi , Jan van Eck , a consultant with the Center for
Conflict Resolution in Cape Town , said that each party must have a
place at the negotiating table _ an approach that seems to have
been adopted by the new mediator to the conflict , Nelson Mandela ,
who has some experience as a uniting force in his own country ,
South Africa .

Oddly , van Eck pointed out , the amount of blood already spilled
may at this point become an argument for ending the violence . In
Burundi , for example , so many people have blood on their hands _
Hutu and Tutsi alike _ that their own mutually awful pasts may
offer an opening for starting anew . `` They always said : Hang all
the people who committed crimes , or shoot them , '' van Eck said .
`` But now there is a realization that there might be too many . ''

NEW RUSSIAN LEADER BEGINS TENURE WITH CHECHEN TRIP

On his first full day as Russia 's acting president ,
Vladimir Putin left before dawn to visit with Russian troops
fighting in Chechnya .

While his predecessor , Boris Yeltsin , spent his first day of
retirement at a government country house outside Moscow , Putin and
his wife , Lyudmila _ he in a turtleneck sweater , she in pants and a
sheepskin coat _ spent what was left of the momentous New Year 's
holiday greeting Russian soldiers and handing out hunting knives as
presidential souvenirs .

Besides offering the nation a new image of an active , concerned
leader , the visit reflected Putin 's close association with the
Chechnya battle . Since he was named prime minister in August as a
largely unknown KGB officer , his visibility and popularity have
soared with the conduct of the campaign in Chechnya .

But now the war has apparently entered a far more difficult
phase as Russian troops seek to dislodge Chechen fighters from
Grozny , the capital . And Putin 's success in presidential elections
now scheduled for March 26 could well hinge on the success of the
campaign , and the ability of the Russian commanders to hold down
their casualties .

In Gudermes , the second-largest city in Chechnya , which is now
in Russian hands , Putin said : `` We are not going to liberate
anything quickly . We are going to do our best . The best means with
the least losses among our personnel , our military men among the
population . ''

Putin again said there was no deadline for concluding the war .

The unexpected trip , taken less than 24 hours after Yeltsin
resigned and handed his job to Putin , gave Russians a different
image of their leadership from the hesitant , breath-holding fumbles
and gaffes they had grown used to in the final years of the Yeltsin
era .

In his brief time in office , Putin _ who retains the office of
prime minister _ has crammed in what previously would have been a
week 's worth of presidential events , including the taping of a
televised New Year 's message , a meeting with the Security Council ,
another with his cabinet and two sessions with Yeltsin , including a
final meeting late Friday at the former president 's residence .

And at 6.30 p.m. Friday he signed a decree , one of his first as
acting president , which apparently held the key to the sudden but
smooth transfer of power . Besides granting Yeltsin and his family
an array of benefits and privileges , the decree gives him immunity
from criminal investigation , and protects his houses , cars , papers
and belongings from search and seizure .

Dmitri Yakushkin , Yeltsin 's press secretary , on Saturday
disputed any suggestion that the president and his former prime
minister had bargained over the terms of the extraordinary transfer
of power Friday .

There were no negotiations , said Yakushkin , who added that the
decree was most likely prepared in advance by Yeltsin 's staff .

The decree , described by Yakushkin as seven pages long ,
describes in precise detail how much of a salary the former
president will get in the initial months after his resignation -LRB- 75
percent of his salary -RRB- , how much money he will have available to
spend on staff , what access he will have to government air and
train terminals , and other perks associated with the top Kremlin
job .

But the immunity clause , limited to the president himself , was
the most striking , hinting at the kinds of concerns that Yeltsin _
whose administration has been scarred by reports of widespread
corruption _ had as he prepared secretly to leave office . Former
aides to Yeltsin have said in the past that the president and his
family would consider early resignation only if their physical
safety and economic security could be guaranteed .

-LRB- STORY CAN END HERE _ OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS -RRB-

Because Yeltsin was the first democratically elected president
in Russia , there were no precedents for such guarantees . Yeltsin ,
who moved into the Kremlin after the dissolution of the Soviet
Union , gave its previous occupant , Mikhail Gorbachev , a generous
package of benefits and privileges and a rent-free office building
when he left office on Dec. 31 , 1991 . But as Gorbachev was to
discover , those benefits could also be taken away , depending on the
whim and mood of the man who granted them in the first place .

Although Putin 's decree ostensibly gives the Yeltsin family the
guarantees it was seeking , the benefits and privileges are still
not fixed in law . Passing a law on the status of former presidents
was a proposal made last summer by former Prime Minister Yevgeny
Primakov , then a leading opposition candidate for the presidency ,
as he tried publicly to assuage Yeltsin 's anxiety about giving up
his Kremlin job .

But by propelling the presidential elections forward by three
months , thus giving Putin _ his preferred successor and the current
political hero _ a considerable advantage , Yeltsin apparently could
not wait for legislation that would have to clear the Russian
Parliament .

According to Yakushkin , Yeltsin kept his decision to resign a
closely guarded secret until the last minute . Although Putin may
have known ahead of time , no official preparations for such a
hand-over of power were made by the Kremlin staff , he said .

As press secretary , he got a call early in the morning , and
found Yeltsin in his Kremlin office at 8:30 a.m. , ready to tape the
broadcast that went on the Russian government channel at noon
Friday . All day Friday , Yeltsin was very calm and friendly ,
Yakushkin said . Yeltsin gave flowers to the television crew , drank
Champagne and said goodbye to many people with whom he had worked .
That was the mood of the day .

BEIJING CAT POACHERS STALK FAMILY PETS

Among the more persistent fables in the West is that
the pork in seedy Chinese restaurants may actually be the meat of
stray cats .

But some Chinese pay good money to eat cat , in a Cantonese dish
called Dragon and Tiger Fight that combines the meat of snakes and
cats .

In the homeland of Cantonese food , the southern province of
Guangdong _ where it is said that people will eat anything with
four legs except the table _ cat is neither a major item on menus
nor a traditional favorite . But a small minority of diners like to
order it , and they carry their preferences with them .

So along with the spread of Cantonese-style restaurants in
Beijing in the last few years has come a new problem : cat-nabbing ,
to supply meat for demanding customers .

Just since September , as many as 500 Beijing families have had
their pet cats stolen , said Lu Di , an elderly Beijing woman who is
a longtime campaigner for animal welfare , a rarity here . There is
no way to confirm her estimate , which she extrapolated from the
many complaints that her Association for the Protection of Small
Animals has heard from anguished cat owners .

`` We must take concrete measures to stop this barbarian
behavior , '' said Ms. Lu , who is also a professor of classical
literature at People 's University . Her expanding national
association _ which claims a membership of 5,000 , including pet
lovers , veterinarians and scientists _ is demanding that the police
take stronger measures to combat the theft of cats and has issued
public warnings to pet owners to beware .

`` It 's a pity that our government has n't taken any action to
stop this , '' she said in an interview . While theft of personal
property is a crime , the police have stood by , she said , as thieves
have grabbed cats and sold them for about $ 3 to wholesale markets .
There , they are sold to restaurants that often keep the cats and
other live animals in cages for inspection by diners .

Beijing has some stray cats , but house animals present an easier
mark . The thieves , who often operate at night , are said to use fish
and birds to lure wandering cats into their bags . Ms. Lu said that
some fearful cat owners have begun to tether their cats at night to
keep them from prowling the newly perilous alleys .

Eating cat meat is of dubious benefit , said Lin Degui , a
veterinary professor at the Beijing Agriculture University .
Sometimes cats carry parasites dangerous to humans , he told The
Beijing Morning Post , and in Guangdong , several people have been
severely sickened by eating the meat of cats that had consumed rat
poison in the streets .

Ms. Lu described a recent case in which six cats in one
northwestern section of Beijing were stolen the same day , as they
lay on their owners ' roofs sunning . The distraught owners searched
nearby restaurants and found the animals in cages . But the local
police refused to help them , saying there was no specific law on
the theft of pets .

The owners later called Ms. Lu 's group , she said , and members
went to the restaurant _ only to find the cages already empty , and
six families in tears .

Hornets ' Jones hoping for a quick comeback

Eddie Jones has rejoined the Charlotte Hornets and
reaffirmed his plans for a quick comeback from an elbow injury .

Jones met with Hornets team physician Glenn Perry and was given
a brace to wear until the torn ligament he suffered after being
fouled by the New York Knicks ' Kurt Thomas Dec. 20 heals .

`` To be honest with you , I do n't want to wear it in the games , ''
Jones said . `` But I might have to . ''

Jones said as soon as the injury was diagnosed that he planned
on returning in three weeks , not the longest-range prospect of six
weeks . `` Like I told people , it was n't going to be any longer than
three weeks , '' he said .

Jones will begin noncontact practice drills next week and be
with the team during a five-game road trip . He plans on making his
return Jan. 13 in a home against Chicago .

Ilgauskas ' return nearer

Remember Zydrunas Ilgauskas ? The Cleveland center has n't played
since fracturing a bone in his left foot in the fifth game last
season . Now , the Cavs think it 's possible that he could return to
practice on Jan. 24 , after the Cavs return from a two-week West
Coast trip . Ilgauskas had a series of tests on Monday at the
Cleveland Clinic .

No official word , but general manager Jim Paxson says he
anticipates Ilgauskas being able to resume rehab and light workouts
in an effort to return to practice at the end of the month .

Self-deprecating Gentry

Alvin Gentry 's alma mater , Appalachian State , is getting a new
arena , so he took some time to reminisce about the old barn he
played in back in the mid-1970s . `` I took my wife back there three
years ago , '' the Pistons coach said . `` I took her past my high
school -LRB- in Shelby , N.C. , -RRB- and told her , ` That 's where the legend
was born . ' Then we went to my college gym , and I told her , ` And
that 's where the legend died . '' '

Carter 's Olympic campaign

Before Vince Carter scored 35 to lead Toronto past Houston ,
Rockets and U.S. Olympic team coach Rudy Tomjanovich was asked
about the second-year player 's chances of making the elite squad .
`` The best thing Vince could do -LRB- to improve his chances -RRB- would be
to sit out , '' Tomjanovich said , prompting laughter .

After the game , Tomjanovich was n't laughing . No dummy , Carter
went over to Tomjanovich to shake his hand . Rod Thorn and Russ
Granik of the NBA make the selections , but Tomjanovich has input .

Dickey who ?

When the Bulls were blown out in New Jersey , Dickey Simpkins
came out wearing a jersey with the spelling of his name
`` Smipkins . '' He said : `` At first , I thought I was from overseas . I
thought I was a foreign player . '' ... The Bulls had three assists in
that game for an all-time league low . They 're not selfish ; they
just ca n't make layups ... If center Jayson Williams can return and
play effectively after the broken leg he suffered last April in a
collision with Stephon Marbury , the Nets might have enough to make
a push for the eighth playoff spot . But coach Don Casey said
Williams has n't practiced yet and might be better off if he
postponed his comeback attempt from January to February .

Knicks ' millennial woes

The Knicks never are at a loss for distractions and controversy .
In the past week , forward John Wallace has been arrested and spent
a night in jail for driving with a suspended license , and power
forward Kurt Thomas has been suspended for two games and fined for
instigating a fight with the Pacers ' Jalen Rose during a Christmas
Day game . Throw in injury problems that reduced their active roster
to nine men and a road loss , and you have a team that still is
struggling . `` It 's Y2K , '' guard Chris Childs joked . `` That 's what
it is . ''

Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

Success comes easily for Virginia Tech 's Vick , who was third in

Just four months ago , only those living in the
small farming town tucked between the Blue Ridge Mountains and
Allegheny Mountains in Southwestern Virginia had any idea about
what the nation was about to witness .

Now , as the national championship game approaches , quarterback
Michael Vick , the steady , sturdy , leader of the second-ranked
Virginia Tech Hokies , is a household name in more locales than
Blacksburg .

Vick needed one season to lead the Hokies to an unbeaten record
and a date with Florida State in Tuesday 's Sugar Bowl . He did so by
showing poise far beyond his 19 years , and a style that has many
comparing him to Charlie Ward , the Seminoles ' Heisman
Trophy-winning quarterback of the early '90s .

`` This is a culmination of a team that -LRB- coach -RRB- Frank -LRB- Beamer -RRB-
has built , that reached its peak and was lacking a quarterback and
the guy showed up , '' Florida State coach Bobby Bowden said . `` The
guy that could make them a team showed up and now they 're the real
deal . ''

Vick 's numbers are n't overwhelming . He completed just 90 passes ,
on 152 attempts , for 1,840 yards and 12 touchdowns . He led the
nation with a 180.4 pass efficiency rating , but he attempted 80
fewer passes than Florida State 's Chris Weinke completed . Vick 's
total offense number of 2,420 yards is n't close to Weinke 's 3,103
passing yards .

Yet , the intangibles that Vick brought the Hokies are
immeasurable , which is why he was third in the Heisman voting ,
tying for the highest finish ever by a freshman .

`` Michael Vick is just getting started , '' Clemson defensive
coordinator Reggie Herring said . `` The way they run the offense ,
protect him with play-action , and got a running game to keep you
off balance ... he 's headed for stardom . ''

Vick redshirted a year ago after listening to Beamer . The Hokies
prepared for Vick to take over by finishing 9-3 last season as Vick
was making a name for himself in practice , running around in the
backfield and throwing balls more than 60 yards .

While Beamer had no doubts who his quarterback would be in 1999 ,
he still was not sure what to expect from an untested player .

`` That 's what we did n't know , how good he will be in the games
themselves , '' Beamer said . `` It did n't take long to see how poised
he was going to be . I believe he likes the pressure situations . He
is very much unlike a redshirt freshman . ''

Vick , who attended high school on Virginia 's east coast , is
surprised by how easily he picked up the college game . Although he
was the No. 5 quarterback prospect in the nation according to
SuperPrep magazine , and posted gaudy numbers at Newport News '
Warwick High -LRB- 4,846 passing yards , 1,048 rushing yards -RRB- , Vick
thought he would need at least a year to adjust to a faster game .

`` I kind of expected to go through a lot of growing pains this
season , '' he said . `` Things happened so fast , I came out there and
was relaxed and its been kind of easy . ''

If not for his high school coach , former World Football League
MVP and actor Tommy Reamon , Vick may have wound up following
Donovan McNabb at Syracuse . Reamon , who played running back Delma
Huddle in the 1970s movie `` North Dallas Forty , '' is not fond of
Syracuse coach Paul Pasqualoni . Reamon believes former Warwick
quarterback Aaron Brooks was unfairly held back at Syracuse for two
years before emerging as a starter his final two years . He saw Vick
falling into the same situation , especially after Syracuse
recruited quarterbacks Troy Nunes and Madei Williams two years ago .

`` They kept saying publicly they had -LRB- Vick -RRB- if it was n't for the
high school coach , '' Reamon said . `` Do n't play games with me . Do n't
play business games with me and my children . Look at it now . Would
you want to put him in that situation ? Two-quarterback system ?

`` I could see it happening . Pasqualoni can talk all day long . ''

Vick took an official visit to Syracuse where McNabb , the
quarterback to whom he was being compared at the time , was his
host . Vick said McNabb did not try to influence his decision .

Vick , more diplomatic than his high school coach , cited two
reasons for choosing Virginia Tech _ staying in state where his
family could see him play and , `` I do n't want to run the option . I
do n't want to get hit a lot . ''

Now , Michael Vick is a big hit . The Hokies ' history at
quarterback never will be confused with that of the University of
Miami 's , but Vick should surpass them all , including two with South
Florida ties : former Dolphins quarterback Don Strock , and Jim
Druckenmiller , whom the Dolphins traded for in September .

Strock , the director of football operations at Florida
International University , played in Blacksburg in 1971 and '72 and
still holds most of the Hokies ' passing records .

`` He 's a tremendous athlete and they use his skills very well , ''
Strock said . `` They get him out of the pocket , he throws on the
run . When you have an athletic quarterback like Vick , it puts a lot
of stress on the defense . ''

Druckenmiller led Virginia Tech to its two previous biggest bowl
dates , the 1995 Sugar against Texas and 1996 Orange against
Nebraska . He believes Vick and the Hokies have been overlooked . He
thought Vick should have finished ahead of Heisman runner-up Joe
Hamilton , and thinks the Hokies are taking a back seat to Florida
State .

`` I still do n't think Virginia Tech gets all the respect we
deserve , '' Druckenmiller said .

Michael Vick should change that .

Tom D'Angelo writes for the Palm Beach Post

Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

Pickens questions keeping Coslet

Bengals receiver Carl Pickens criticized owner and
general manager Mike Brown , who last week decided to keep coach
Bruce Coslet for at least one more season .

`` I do n't understand it , '' Pickens said . `` We 're trying to win .
We 're trying to turn this thing around out there . And they bring
him back . What can you do ? Obviously , the players do n't call the
shots around here . ''

Pickens later issued a statement retracting his comments , but
the damage seemed to be done .

`` I learned a long time ago you ca n't please everybody , '' Coslet
said . `` I prefer to put my focus on all the players that have
supported me , not only publicly but individually and privately . I
think I have my team 's support . I think that 's never been a
question . ''

Going into today 's game at Jacksonville , Cincinnati is 21-35 in
31/2 seasons under Coslet . The Bengals are 52-107 in the 1990s ,
officially making them the worst team of the decade .

Uncertain future in Buffalo

The 49ers and Cowboys are n't the only NFL teams with an aging
core of stars . The Bills also face an uncertain future .

Andre Reed , the team 's all-time leading receiver , might play his
last game today at home against the Colts . Reed , 35 , has a $ 2.375
million cap charge in 2000 , including a $ 1.775 million base salary .
His role has diminished over the second half of the season .

Defensive end Bruce Smith 's cap figure will be $ 5.448 million
next season , and running back Thurman Thomas ' about $ 2 million .

The Bills probably ca n't keep all three players and re-sign
guard Ruben Brown , receiver Eric Moulds , safety Kurt Schulz and
cornerback Thomas Smith , all of whom are eligible for free-agency
after the season .

`` There 's just a lot of things you have to look into , '' Thomas
said . `` I think that 's going to be left up to -LRB- general manager -RRB-
John Butler and -LRB- owner -RRB- Ralph Wilson , whether they want us around
here or not . ''

Cleveland QB likes Warrick

For the second year in a row , the expansion Browns will have the
No. 1 pick in April 's draft . And Cleveland quarterback Tim Couch
already is lobbying general manager Dwight Clark to pick Florida
State receiver Peter Warrick .

Couch , the top pick in 1999 from Kentucky , joked he might stroll
past Clark 's office `` and just kind of yell the little Florida
State fight song . ''

`` I think -LRB- Warrick -RRB- is a good player , '' Couch said . `` I think he
can help us out a lot and give us somebody to go along with Darrin
Chiaverini and Kevin Johnson and give us that good third receiver .
I think he 'd fit in real well . ''

Even Clark somewhat tipped his hand . Warrick and Penn State
linebacker Lavar Arrington and defensive end Courtney Brown are
considered the top three prospects for the draft .

`` I think we have to get Tim Couch some weapons , '' Clark said .
`` I think he 's proven he can be a great quarterback in this league .
He 's got a lot of development to go through yet , but he 's shown
signs of brilliance , and I think he 'll continue to get better . So ,
we have to get him some weapons to go to , and we have to protect
him . ''

Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

A year of highs and lows in the NFL

As the NFL heads into its last regular-season games on
the first weekend of 2000 , beat reporter Mark Schlabach takes a
look back at a surprising 1999 season :

OFFENSIVE MVP

1 . Marshall Faulk , RB , Rams . Faulk should break the NFL record
for yards from scrimmage in a season .

2 . Peyton Manning , QB , Colts . Manning is the NFL 's best
quarterback in only his second season .

3 . Edgerrin James , RB , Colts . No wonder Indianapolis drafted him
ahead of Heisman Trophy winner Ricky Williams .

4 . Kurt Warner , QB , Rams . Warner should join Miami 's Dan Marino
as the only NFL quarterbacks to throw 40 TD passes in a season .

5 . Stephen Davis , RB , Redskins . Davis ' running set up the deep
pass for Brad Johnson and Michael Westbrook .

DEFENSIVE MVP

1 . Warren Sapp , DT , Buccaneers . He might be the most dominant
player in the league .

2 . Kevin Carter , DE , Rams . Carter is as important to St. Louis
on defense as Warner and Faulk are on offense .

3 . Jevon Kearse , DE , Titans . How could 15 teams have passed up
this physical specimen ?

4 . Ray Lewis , LB , Ravens . Lewis leads the league in tackles .

5 . Robert Porcher , DT , Lions . Porcher broke the team record for
sacks in a season , with 141/2 .

COACH OF THE YEAR

1 . Bill Parcells , Jets . Just when it seemed the Jets would fold ,
they stunned the Bills and Cowboys and the Dolphins twice .

2 . Jim Mora , Colts . Mora has regained respect after quitting in
New Orleans .

3 . Dick Vermeil , Rams . Would Vermeil be here if Trent Green had
not been injured in the preseason ?

4 . Mike Shanahan , Broncos . Denver was competitive despite losing
John Elway , Terrell Davis and Shannon Sharpe .

5 . Gunther Cunningham , Chiefs . The first-year coach has Kansas
City playing hard and with discipline .

ROOKIE OF THE YEAR

1 . Edgerrin James , RB , Colts . James earned nearly $ 15 million in
salary and incentives , which is what many thought Ricky Williams
would do this season .

2 . Jevon Kearse , DE , Titans . Kearse , a linebacker at Florida ,
twice this season broke the NFL record for sacks by a rookie .

3 . Tim Couch , QB , Browns . Couch peformed well despite playing
behind the league 's worst offensive line .

4 . Champ Bailey , CB , Redskins . The former Georgia star set
rookie record with three picks in one game but seemed to fade late
in the season .

5 . Damien Woody , C , Patriots . In a few years , the former Boston
College star will be the NFL 's top center .

COMEBACK PLAYER OF THE YEAR

1 . Bryant Young , DT , 49ers . Young is back in the Pro Bowl only a
year after a horrific leg injury .

2 . Jeff George , QB , Vikings . The former Falcon rescued
Minnesota , his third team in six years .

3 . Tyrone Wheatley , RB , Raiders . Traded by the Giants and cut by
the Dolphins in the preseason , he was a star in Oakland .

4 . Jeff Blake , QB , Bengals . Benched and injured in 1998 , Blake
will get a big contract from someone in the offseason .

5 . Alonzo Spellman , DT , Cowboys . The former Bear 's comeback off
the field has been even more remarkable .

ROOKIE STEALS

These players were overlooked in the draft but outplayed several
high-profile rookies :

1 . Olandis Gary , RB , Broncos . The fourth-rounder should break
Bobby Humphrey 's team record for rushing yards by a rookie .

2 . Terrence Wilkins , KR/WR , Colts . The undrafted rookie from
Virginia has scored three different ways and should be playing in
the Pro Bowl .

3 . Martin ramatica , K , Buccaneers . Gramatica was a
third-rounder , but the former Kansas State star has been
`` automatica . ''

4 . Mike McKenzie , CB , Packers . The last of three defensive backs
drafted by Green Bay , the former Memphis star played the best .

5 . Wali Rainer , LB , Browns . The fourth-rounder replaced retired
star Chris Spielman .

COACHES ON THE HOT SEAT

These coaches might get pink slips from their owners :

1 . Pete Carroll , Patriots . Carroll 's team collapsed in the
second half ; his agent already is making telephone calls .

2 . Mike Ditka , Saints . Ditka says he 's coming back , but others
are n't so convinced that owner Tom Benson wo n't clean house .

3 . Chan Gailey , Cowboys . The decision that Norv Turner will stay
in Washington might give the Americus native one more year in
Dallas .

4 . Bill Cowher , Steelers . How desperate is Cowher to leave
Pittsburgh ? He confirmed rumors linking him to N.C. State .

5 . Ray Rhodes , Packers . Rhodes will have to shake up his staff ,
at least , after a disappointing first season in Green Bay .

ON THE RISE

These players are very close to being stars :

1 . Donnie Abraham , CB , Buccaneers . Abraham should be starting in
the Pro Bowl instead of Deion Sanders .

2 . Barrett Robbins , C , Raiders . Robbins is a big reason why the
Raiders lead the league in rushing offense .

3 . Robert Hicks , OT , Bills . In his second season , the former
Douglass High star has outstanding feet and technique .

4 . Marcus Robinson , WR , Bears . The Fort Valley native probably
cost Curtis Conway his job .

5 . Stephen Alexander , TE , Redskins . The second-year pro can
block and has outstanding hands .

UNSUNG HEROES

These guys are some of the unsung heroes you probably never have
heard of :

1 . Norman Hand , DT , Chargers . The former Mississippi star is a
big reason why San Diego is so tough against the run .

2 . Patrick Jeffers , WR , Panthers . Jeffers is a big , fast
receiver with good hands -- just what the Falcons could have used .

3 . Aaron Beasley , CB , Jaguars . The former West Virginia star
inexplicably was snubbed in voting for the Pro Bowl .

4 . Jason Belser , SS , Colts . In his eighth season , Belser put
some bite into the Indianapolis secondary .

5 . London Fletcher , LB , Rams . The undrafted rookie from John
Carroll University is one of the league 's fastest linebackers .

CRYSTAL BALL

Fearless predictions for the 2000 season :

1 . Quarterback Steve Young returns to the 49ers , but receiver
Jerry Rice does n't , because San Francisco ca n't fit both players
under the salary cap .

2 . Receiver Michael Irvin retires because of a neck injury , and
Cowboys owner Jerry Jones replaces him with the Raiders ' Tim Brown ,
a native of Dallas .

3 . Jets coach Bill Parcells returns for one more season , but
quarterback Vinny Testaverde does n't win back his job from Ray
Lucas .

4 . Patriots coach Pete Carroll is fired by owner Robert Kraft ,
who hires Jets assistant head coach Bill Belichick .

5 . Dolphins quarterback Dan Marino and coach Jimmy Johnson
return to Miami and live happily ever after -- with running back
Barry Sanders .

TOP FIVE STORIES

he top five news developments of the 1999 season :

1 . Walter Payton dies -- The Chicago Bears legend succumbed to
cancer after a long battle with liver disease and , as always ,
`` Sweetness '' handled it with class .

2 . Injuries : Injuries sidelined several of the league 's top
players , including Jamal Anderson , Terrell Davis , Steve Young ,
Vinny Testaverde and Michael Irvin .

3 . Rae Carruth arrested -- Carolina receiver was charged with
murder in the shooting death of his pregnant girlfriend .

4 . Houston awarded franchise -- Houston businessman Bob McNair
landed a team for the former home of Oilers ; Los Angeles was passed
over again .

5 . Barry Sanders retires : Lions running back abruptly retired
before the season , but Detroit made the playoffs anyway .

FALLING FAST

These aging players are past their prime :

1 . Charles Haley , DE , 49ers . A big factor in the playoffs last
season , Haley was n't even on the stat sheets this year .

2 . Ben Coates , TE , Patriots . Coates ' attitude and mouth probably
have worn out their welcome in New England .

3 . Steve Atwater , FS , Jets . The Jets learned what Denver already
knew : Atwater is slow and no longer can cover receivers .

4 . Morten Andersen , K , Falcons . Once a weapon late in the game ,
Andersen barely is getting chances at 39 .

5 . Dan Marino , QB , Dolphins . His arm seems to get tired , and his
decisions are n't as sharp , either .

TIRED ACTS

These guys ' antics and behavior have gotten very old :

1 . Ryan Leaf , QB , Chargers . The former Washington State star
owns this space .

2 . Jimmy Johnson , coach , Dolphins . Johnson should quit blaming
Dan Marino and look in the mirror . Johnson 's the one who rested his
running game on troubled Cecil Collins ' shoulders .

3 . Bill Romanowski , LB , Broncos . He will break the NFL records
for illegal hits and fines before he retires .

4 . Michael Westbrook , WR , Redskins . Even when he 's playing well ,
Westbrook ca n't keep his mouth shut . His charges of nepotism were
outrageous .

5 . Joey Galloway , WR , Seahawks . Is it just a coincidence that
the Seahawks collapsed after his return from a contract holdout ?

DIRECT DEPOSIT

These players are laughing all the way to the bank after putting
up huge numbers in contract years :

1 . Simeon Rice , DE , Cardinals . Arizona already has too much
money invested in its defensive line , so Rice could end up in his
native Chicago in 2000 .

2 . Corey Dillon , RB , Bengals . Cincinnati offered him
Duce-Staley-like money ; Dillon will get a contract more like Jamal
Anderson 's .

3 . Tony Brackens , DE , Jaguars . Another top pass rusher , but his
history of injuries still is a concern .

4 . Chuck Smith , DE , Falcons . The Falcons probably ca n't afford
him , but Green Bay or Jacksonville probably can .

5 . Jeff George , QB , Vikings . Minnesota might have too much money
invested in Randall Cunningham and Daunte Culpepper to re-sign
George .

Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

Jeffers gets his wish to remain a Panther

Carolina receiver Patrick Jeffers has been red-hot
lately , after battling injuries through the first half of the
season . In the past four games , he has 28 receptions for 552 yards
and six touchdowns .

His effort paid off Thursday in a new four-year contract with
the Panthers . The former Virginia star who spent two years in
Denver and one in Dallas had been scheduled to become an
unrestricted free agent on March 1 .

Jeffers , in his first season with Carolina , had not wanted to
leave the Panthers , but he had worried that the team might not be
able to afford him .

`` I 've said all along this is where I want to be and if my agent
feels like the offer they make is a fair one , I 'd be more than
happy to sign it , '' Jeffers had said before the deal .

Ditka has attitude adjustment

After his team stunned the Cowboys on Christmas Eve , Saints
coach Mike Ditka seems to be friendlier and more confident .

`` Did I say that -LRB- I 'll be back next year -RRB- ? What a cocky guy , ''
Ditka said . `` I just believe I 'll be back . There 's no revelation to
it . An angel of the Lord did n't come down and say , ` You 're going to
be back . ' I just believe I 'm going to be back . I want to be back .
And I 'll be back . ''

Ditka said he has n't met with owner Tom Benson to discuss the
future but did admit that he told his players last week that he 'll
return .

`` I have n't acted any different , '' Ditka said . `` Right now , I
resign myself to the fact that I really believe that I 'll be back .
There might have even been a moment where it did n't bother me that
much one way or the other . But now it would bother me , because I
really want to make some people really mad .

`` I told my mom a long time ago I 'd like to live to be 150 . She
said , ` Why ? ' I said I 'd like to make the rest of the people mad
that I have n't made mad yet . I want to get a few in this town . So ,
coming back would make a few of them mad , you 've got to admit
that . ''

Arizona coach lobbying for extension

Arizona coach Vince Tobin issued an ultimatum of sorts , despite
the Cardinals ' three-game losing streak that knocked them out of
the playoffs .

Tobin , who has one year left on his contract , is publicly
lobbying Cardinals owner Bill Bidwill for an extension .

`` The Cardinals have to sit down and -LRB- decide -RRB- , ` What direction
are we going ? ' '' Tobin said . `` Were the Cardinals moving in the
direction we want to go with me at the helm ? If that 's so , then
we 'll work it out . If they think not , then I 'm sure we 'll work it
out the other way . ''

Tobin seemed to say he would rather be fired than become a
lame-duck coach in 2000 . Tobin is 28-38 as a head coach after his
team slipped to 6-9 a year after the franchise 's first playoff
berth in 51 years .

`` I just think it 's hard to coach a football team going into the
last year of your contract , '' he said , `` for your own free agents ,
for other people 's free agents , your control over your football
team and just the speculation . There was speculation this year ,
and , if we went into next year , there would be speculation every
day , every week , on good plays and bad plays , good decisions and
bad decisions . You need to have closure . ''

Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

Detroit off to fast start after failure last season

Nobody is quite ready to do celebratory swan dives
into the Detroit River just yet . Regular-season victories in
Hockeytown do little except to affirm to fans that forward lines
are set for the playoffs .

But as the NHL season nears the midway point , the Detroit Red
Wings look closer to being a Stanley Cup team now than they did
last year .

The Wings have the best record in hockey , and they continued to
string together wins despite the absences of goalie Chris Osgood
and forward Slava Kozlov . After a narrow 3-2 overtime win over the
Thrashers that locals attributed to post-holiday blahs , Detroit
traveled to Buffalo the next night and waxed the Sabres 7-2 . The
team 's goals-against average -LRB- 2.30 -RRB- is in the top five in the
league , and forwards seemingly produce any time they have to _ or
are prodded into doing so .

`` We finally started coming around in the third period of the
Atlanta game , '' assistant coach Dave Lewis said . `` But that 's our
team . We have some veteran guys , who , if you watched practice ,
you 'd wonder how they 're able to play in this league . They wait for
the games . ''

Last season , they often waited for the games to matter , and then
it was too late . The Wings suffered from some expected post-Cup
blues last season , and it was reflected in their team defense . As a
result , general manager Ken Holland worked several trade-deadline
deals that imported veterans and exported draft picks . However , it
did n't work .

`` We started slow last year , but our feeling was in the second
half of the season we would be more consistent , '' he said . `` We
felt we needed to do something to jump start the team . We went
something like 10-1 after the trades , and we won six consecutive
playoff games . But then we had some injuries and Colorado elevated
its game in the playoffs and ... ''

And the Wings lost . After two consecutive Cups , the perception
was that Holland had mortgaged the future to squeeze one more title
out of the team and failed . Only defenseman Chris Chelios was kept
from last year 's trades , and , Lewis said , `` He feels more
comfortable this year . Last season , it took awhile for him to get
adjusted with his family , to the jersey , everything . He almost
tried too hard . ''

This year , Chelios leads the NHL in plus-minus at plus-36 . He
has been paired with Steve Duchense , whose career appeared dead
after he bombed out with three teams in the span of a year . He has
been rejuvenated in Motown . The other move that has paid off was
unrestricted free agent Pat Verbeek , a key piece to Dallas ' Stanley
Cup team . Verbeek had 18 points in his first 23 games and was a
plus-21 , second to Chelios on the team .

Dallas has n't hit its stride yet . Many people think that
Colorado will be a second-half team because of its recent personnel
turnover , but for now it 's a .500 club . St. Louis is strong but
ca n't match Detroit 's depth . Phoenix needs to prove it can win a
playoff series .

The Wings ' path appears set through the Western Conference
playoffs to the finals .

`` It 's too early for that , '' Lewis said . `` Being in first place
and the stats and all that is nice , but we 're measured by what we
do in the playoffs . ''

Holland said , `` We only have a certain amount of time with this
group . '' He said he still thinks that Dallas and Colorado will be
the Wings ' primary competition in the playoffs .

But going into a Cup chase not as the defending champions has
advantages .

`` Look at Dallas in the first 25 games this year , '' he said .
`` It 's tough when you play until the middle of June and then have
to get back on the ice for training camp . And then everybody is
judging their year on how they play against you . You 're the
measuring stick . It 's hard to get pumped up in October . ''

Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

NHL East notes

Primeau deal goes bust

Despite the fact Carolina 's deal to send Keith Primeau , a
minor-league defenseman and two draft picks to Phoenix for Keith
Tkachuk fell through , it 's more certain than ever Primeau will not
be back with the Hurricanes . When it was learned Primeau had
pre-approved a four-year , $ 16.9 million contract with the Coyotes ,
which is not far off the offers Carolina had tendered , ` Canes
winger Gordie Roberts went ballistic . `` He has hung this entire
team out to dry , '' Roberts said . `` We 're going out there on the ice
busting our butts every night , and he 's been rejecting offers that
have been fair . I would n't be saying this if I did n't think the
team had made fair offers . Twenty million dollars . Twelve million
dollars . What 's the difference between the Phoenix deal and what
he 's been offered here ? ... As a team , we 've been taking the
approach that Primeau is like an injured player and he 'll be coming
back . Now , we 've got to stop thinking about him and just get on
with it . '' Primeau said Roberts ' anger is `` misdirected , '' adding ,
`` Everything was all right -LRB- this season -RRB- when they were winning
games . All of a sudden , I 'm responsible for them losing seven of
the last nine games ? ''

A slow burn in Boston

This is not an endorsement for Boston to fire coach Pat Burns ,
but after going 2-7-4 in a span of 13 games , Burns has come to the
conclusion that his players have rejected his philosophies . `` I
just ca n't understand it , '' he said . `` Over the past two years ,
this club has played a certain way . We 've picked up 180-odd points
in two years , we 've gone three rounds in the playoffs . All of a
sudden , it 's not good enough anymore . Now , we have to pinch , we
have to take chances , be more offensive and try to copy other teams
and this is the result _ giving up two-on-ones . I watched New
Jersey-Buffalo and Buffalo gave up about 10 two-on-ones . If you 're
going to play like that , you 're not going to win too many hockey
games . '' Burns said when he asked one player how he wanted to play ,
the player responded , `` Creatively . '' For structured coaches like
Burns , `` creativity '' is synonymous with poison .

Briefly ...

The Panthers , convinced Trevor Kidd 's return this year is a long
shot , made a good move acquiring Mike Vernon from San Jose . Despite
his age , Vernon , 36 , might have one good year left in him . The
Panthers also are on the hook for only the remaining $ 2.4 million
of his $ 4.38 million contract this year . But Vernon also has a
$ 3.25 million option kick in for next year if he plays 40 games -LRB- 25
more -RRB- ... It 's becoming more likely that John McMullen will sell
the New Jersey Devils and become a minority owner of the New York
Jets . Expect the selling price to the YankeesNets group to come at
about $ 165 million _ a slight escalation over the $ 34 million
McMullen paid in 1992 ... Alexei Yashin returned to the United
States to spend time with family members and girlfriend , Carol Alt ,
but says he will be back in Switzerland this week working out with
a club team there . Nothing new on talks with Ottawa .

Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

Following in daddy 's footsteps

FACEOFF : BRETT HULL

Right winger , Dallas Stars

Update : Entering the weekend looking for career goal No. 600 , a
mark reached by only 11 other players . Second on the Stars this
year with 13 goals and 28 points in 37 games .

On approaching the 610 goals scored by his father , Bobby : `` To
be able to have followed in his footsteps has been a thrill for me
more than anything , and to have been able to reach the level that
he played , being a Hall of Famer and voted the eighth-best player
in the Top 50 list that came out last year , I mean , it is a huge
thrill . I told someone this year I wish I could get to 610 and then
just quit counting or quit or something . But it will also be an
honor if I am able to pass him . ''

Comparing styles with his father : `` He was so powerful and so
fast and strong . I do n't know which one of the guys in the family
got it , but it was n't me . I just lumbered around the ice . I kind of
developed a style , like a stealth mode , and just weave my way in
and out of holes . ''

On having dreams he 'll never score again : `` The dream is coming
true here . I bet you I have had 50 shots in the last three games .
They 're not going in like they used to . I tell the guys on the
bench , ` That one used to go in off someone 's foot . ' I am still
creating lots of chances , and , if you keep doing that , they are
bound to go in . But every day I am scared to death I will never
score another one . ''

On how long he 'll play : `` The game is n't a whole bunch of fun to
play anymore . But it is also a game that I love . I come to the rink
every day hoping that it is going to change back to the way it was .
And honestly , they pay such nice sums of money to us that you would
be crazy to retire until they kick you off the ice . ''

STAT PACK

Here are the NHL 's all-time leading goal scorers , arranged by
their career goals-per-game average -LRB- through Dec. 29 . -RRB- :

PlayerGoalsGamesGPG

Mario Lemieux613745 .823

Brett Hull599898 .667

Wayne Gretzky8941 ,487.601

Bobby Hull6101 ,063.574

Marcel Dionne731731 .542

Phil Esposito7171 ,282.559

Steve Yzerman6081 ,215.500

Mike Gartner7081 ,432.494

Dino Ciccarelli6081 ,232.494

Jari Kurri6011 ,251.480

Gordie Howe8011 ,767.453

Mark Messier6151 ,433.429

QUOTE/UNQUOTE

I would hate to think that this trade was killed out of spite or
animosity or to hurt me or my family . ''

_ Carolina holdout Keith Primeau , after Hurricanes owner Peter
Karmanos apparently squelched a deal that would have sent the
All-Star to Phoenix

Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

NHL West notes

Wile E. Coyotes

Phoenix 's decision to dangle stars Keith Tkachuk and Jeremy
Roenick as trade bait could have ramifications on a team that has
been playing well under first-year coach Bobby Francis . The
Coyotes , who are losing an average of $ 10 million a season and will
continue to operate in the red for two years until they move into
their new arena , want to dump a contract . Roenick will make $ 5
million next season , then become an unrestricted free agent .
Tkachuk 's deal balloons from $ 4.3 million to $ 8.3 million next
year . Carolina owner Peter Karmanos called it `` a stupid
contract . '' -LRB- amusing considering this is the guy who signed Sergei
Fedorov to a six-year , $ 38 million offer sheet -RRB- . Now that Tkachuk
and Roenick know they 're on the block , how will the team 's two best
players perform ? Tkachuk said , `` I want to play here . I want to
spend the rest of my life here . It 's about the money . I 'm not
worried about it . I 'm sure they 've thought about trading everybody .
I 've been through this a lot . They have n't traded me yet . If they
do , my wife will be devastated . So will I. ''

Sharks take big risk

San Jose 's decision to deal veteran backup goalie Mike Vernon to
Florida leaves 24-year-old Evgeni Nabokov as the only safety net if
Steve Shields is injured . But the Sharks felt they needed to add
toughness . That 's why they immediately moved Radek Dvorak -LRB- acquired
from the Panthers -RRB- to the New York Rangers for Todd Harvey . The
right winger has been injury prone and has only three goals in 31
games this year , but Sharks GM Dean Lombardi said , `` Harvey 's the
type of guy I 'd affectionately say is a jerk to play against . It 's
something we felt we had to add to this group . Nobody is saying
he 's a 40-goal scorer , but he does have the ability to chip in . He
plays with a lot of energy . He has shown the ability to be a
leader . ''

Briefly ...

The surprise was n't that Joe Sakic finally tallied his 1,000 th
career point ; the surprise was he assisted on a goal by ... Chris
Dingman ? `` That 'll be a trivia question : Who 's the one that
scored ? '' Dingman said . `` I do n't know if too many people will know
the answer to that one . '' ... Sakic becomes an unrestricted free
agent after the season but said he may agree to salary arbitration
and sign a one-year contract with the Avs . `` I 'd like to sign a
long-term deal with a no-trade clause , '' he said . `` If I do n't ,
we 'll just do arbitration . I did pretty well -LRB- testing the market -RRB-
last time , but I like it here and I want to stay here . '' ...
Calgary defenseman Phil Housley signed a two-year -LRB- plus an option -RRB-
contract extension with the Flames and passed up unrestricted free
agency after realizing his preferred destination , the expansion
Minnesota Wild , probably was n't going to sign him ... With
several Detroit teammates returning from injuries , rookie Jiri
Fischer lost his dressing stall at Joe Louis Arena and was given a
folding chair near the Gatorade table . `` Youngest player on the
team , '' the 19-year-old said . `` That 's the way it goes . ''

Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

Hawks ' center moves by tragic story

The Atlanta Hawks ' Lorenzen Wright nearly wept when he
learned about the tragic story of 9-year-old Travis Butler , alone
in a house with his dead mother in the Memphis projects ,

`` I grew up where he was growing up , '' Wright said . `` I went to
the same school -LRB- South Park Elementary -RRB- he attended . The idea of
losing your only parent and being so afraid that you would be put
in a home that you do n't tell anyone , I could relate to that and be
thankful I have both my parents . ''

That 's why Wright joined fellow Memphis natives Penny Hardaway
and Elliott Perry in donating $ 3,000 each to a trust fund for
Perry . Todd Day kicked in another $ 1,000 , bringing the trust fund
for young Butler to $ 40,000 .

`` I would like to reach out to him on a personal level , '' Wright
said . The Hawks center runs a summertime basketball camp in his
hometown and wants Travis to attend . `` I think something like that
would allow him to feel better about himself . ''

The Butler story hit newspapers a week after Thanksgiving . The
9-year-old 's mother , Crystal Wells , 30 , a pharmacy school student ,
died of complications from a noncancerous carcinoid tumor on Nov.
3 , but her body was not discovered by neighbors until Dec. 6 .

Fearful after hearing tales about foster care , young Butler went
to school each day as though nothing had happened . He did his own
grocery shopping from money in the house , prepared his own meals ,
fixed pizza for his Thanksgiving meal . At the time Wells ' body was
found , little Butler was preparing to pay household bills . He
already had written checks , his maternal grandmother said .

Butler is now living in Carthage , Miss. with the grandmother ,
Shirley Wilder , and the trust is being administered by the National
Bank of Commerce .

And while Wright and other NBA players from Memphis will get
credit for caring and giving , their involvement probably would not
have happened except for the reaction of the Hawks ' vice president
for media relations , Arthur Triche , whose son , Brandon , is about
the same age as Travis Butler .

Triche brought the story to Wright , then contacted Hardaway and
Day through the Phoenix Suns and Perry through the New Jersey Nets .

`` One of the saddest stories I 've ever encountered , '' Triche
said the day it was published . `` I ca n't imagine this . We 've just
got to find a way to do something for this child . ''

Later , he learned that the four Memphis players were eager to
help themselves .

`` I think once they heard the story they were as touched as I
was , '' Triche said . `` How could you not open your heart to the
plight of a young boy in that circumstance ? ''

Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

NBA NOTES : Checkin ' out the hair in Orlando

Ben Wallace 's hairstyle has become one of the big
sports stories in Orlando .

Wallace likes corn rows because they are nice and neat , but a
poll of Magic fans show that 62 percent want him to keep the retro
big Afro he has worn lately . Here 's why :

The Magic won seven of nine games after Wallace let his hair
free in early December . That they dropped two games last week by a
combined five points might indicate that the charm has gone .

But does Wallace have the courage to change and perhaps `` doom ''
his team to mediocrity ? Orlando was 8-9 in corn-row games .

Wallace wore the Afro in his finest game of the season , leading
the Magic to victory over Charlotte with 14 points , 15 rebounds and
six blocked shots .

`` He 's like Sampson _ the longer the hair , the more power he
has , '' coach Doc Rivers said . `` Now , we 've just got to keep Delilah
away from him . ''

`` They 're chanting for the ` fro , but they are n't the ones who
have to keep it combed . It 's a lot of work when it 's long , ''
Wallace said . `` I 'll probably just have it rolled back up -LRB- in corn
rows -RRB- . ''

Not so darling kings

They may be the darlings of the NBA , but the Sacramento Kings
appear far away from taking the step that would make them true
contenders in the league .

Including Wednesday 's victory over Seattle , the Kings are 8-10
since they started the season 9-2 and appeared to justify the faith
that Turner sports showed by scheduling them for TNT and TBS more
than any other team in the league .

Some of the symptoms : Nick Anderson is back to where he was the
year before last in Orlando , hanging out on the 3-point line ,
shooting 35 percent from the floor and fearing any trip to the foul
line , where he has severe problems . Jason Williams is shooting 36
percent , 28 percent on threes , which he often takes from a step or
two behind the line .

Chris Webber says , `` We 're nothing special . Darlings of the NBA ,
Cinderellas , all that is thrown out the window , 'cause , if we 're
all of that and we do n't win , that means nothing . We 'll be a bunch
of cute little kids , cute guys for the next five or six years and
it does n't matter . We need to win . ''

The hard part , coach Rick Adelman , said , is that `` people talk
about that -LRB- NBA darling label -RRB- , and I think for us to become a
better team and to be a good team , we have to defend better , and
we 've got to rebound the ball better . And , really , a lot of times ,
our decision-making _ if things are going good , you can be
creative , do a lot of things . When things are n't , you 've got to be
a little bit more disciplined . We 're struggling with that a little
bit right now , but I think it 's going to come . This team 's only
been together , the main guys , for 70 games . It 's a very young team .
... With experience , they 're going to get much better . ''

THUMBS UP

Utah 's retiring president Frank Layden , who got out while he
still had his health and his sense of humor . Thanks for all the fun
he provided for everyone around the NBA for nearly a quarter
century after starting as a Hawks assistant coach under Hubie
Brown .

THUMBS DOWN

Knicks tough guy Kurt Thomas grabbed Eddie Jones ' left arm so
hard to stop a layup that Jones suffered a torn ligament in his
elbow , putting him out six week . Six days later , Thomas threw a
combination of punches at Jalen Rose of Indiana and was hit with a
two-game suspension , plus $ 10,000 in fines .

Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

Motivated Grant Long returns

Grant Long , whose loss to Vancouver left the Hawks
without a rudder , finally is playing after suffering a concussion
and a cartilage injury . In a 100-93 loss to Philadelphia , Long had
eight rebounds in 22 minutes . He talked about his excitement at
playing again .

`` I do n't know if you guys watch major league baseball a lot , ''
Long said , `` but Sammy Sosa is one of my favorite players , and he
takes off from the dugout and he tears out to center field . He 's
just happy to be out on the field playing major league baseball ,
and that 's my appreciation . When I 'm out there on the floor , I 'm
happy to be playing NBA basketball . I run out there . I 'm smiling
because I 'm enjoying myself . ''

The Grizzlies crowd gave Long a rousing hand . The 33-year-old
did not hold back . He took it hard to the rim against Todd
MacCulloch and George Lynch , drawing a foul and getting to the
line . He crashed with Billy Owens inside , drew a charge on Tyrone
Hill and yelled out the defensive calls .

`` It was yeoman 's work , '' Shareef Abdur-Rahim said . `` It 's what
he brings to the team , just that blue-collar mentality . ''

Bryant goes his way

The tug of war continues in Los Angeles : In the final seconds of
a tied game with Dallas , Phil Jackson drew a play for Kobe Bryant
to pass to Glen Rice . Bryant saw an opening he could n't resist ,
drove , got fouled and made the foul shots for the winning points .

`` It does n't matter . If I come off a screen and the guy gives me
the lane , I 'm gone , '' Bryant said . On Phil Jackson 's reaction : `` He
just kind of looked at me . Just did one of those '' _ the Lakers
guard mimicked Jackson 's stare . `` It was like _ it went in . So ,
whatever .

Mavs rookie cans another agent

For the second time in his brief , turmoil-filled NBA career ,
Mavericks rookie Leon Smith has fired his agent .

Matt Muehlebach was notified of the change Tuesday in a letter
signed by Smith , the 19-year-old who was suspended without pay on
Dec. 6 after two arrests in a 24-hour span . Muehlebach replaced Dan
Fegan.Ostertag awakens

In Utah 's victory over Phoenix Tuesday , Greg Ostertag had five
points , two rebounds and two blocks in the fourth quarter . He had
not played in the first three . Jazz forward Karl Malone said , `` He
was as alive as any time I 've seen him in the last four or five
years . '' ... One night later , Jerry Sloan became the third coach in
history to win 600 games with one franchise , when the Jazz beat the
Grizzlies 101-90 . He is 600-281 in Utah . The other coaches with 600
wins with one team are Red Auerbach -LRB- 795 , Boston -RRB- and Red Holzman
-LRB- 613 , New York -RRB- .

LaFrentz returning to form

In Denver , Raef LaFrentz continues to play more confidently on
his repaired left knee . Over four games , he scored 81 points and
made 35 of 66 shots . He 's shooting 30-for-70 on three-pointers .

The former Kansas star has been working a nearly unstoppable
baseline fadeaway jumper , lofting it over big centers Bryant Reeves
of Vancouver , and the Clippers ' Michael Olowokandi and 7-foot-3
Keith Closs . `` That one 's been with me since junior high , ''
LaFrentz said .

Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

Bradley 's easygoing style wins rave reviews in presidential run

Something about putting on shorts for years
and dribbling a ball before thousands changes the way a performer
reacts in front of crowds .

The tension of stage fright _ common among those who act , play
the concert piano or , in most cases , run for public office _ is
missing . The muscles do n't tighten in the same way and the face
assumes a loose , locker-room quality of disregard for the attention
being focused on it .

As much as any of the traditional Democratic initiatives he
proposes in his platform , this low-key demeanor , epitomized by the
throat lozenge tumbling constantly in his mouth during his
speeches , distinguishes former Sen. Bill Bradley out on the stump .

Bradley tells audiences the `` radical premise '' of his campaign
is that he can go out and simply tell people what he believes `` and
have a chance of winning . '' The style in which he outlines these
beliefs matters as well .

At times , Bradley 's steadfast refusal to hit rhetorical high
notes can be frustrating . In a room like the one filled with Jewish
voters at a recent conference in Atlanta , there 's a sense of
listeners waiting for a resolving chord that does n't sound .

But when he connects , his manner gives him the freedom to do
things that draw a sharp contrast with Vice President Al Gore 's
stiff reputation .

`` No ! '' his face wrapped around the microphone in mock shock
when an Iowa voter mentions some new charge Gore has made .
Discussing the evils of political money , he wheels his 6-foot-5
frame around , pretending to kick a lobbyist in the rear .

Voters , especially liberal Democrats longing to hear their
ideals voiced again , frequently walk away saying things like `` one
of us , '' `` straightforward , '' `` has his feet on the ground . ''

`` Performer , '' by the way , is a word Bradley himself uses in
talking about what a politician does . But he makes a careful
distinction .

`` What I was doing out there was not a performance , it was a
dialogue , '' the Rhodes scholar , New York Knicks star and New Jersey
Democrat said last week after meeting with a group of voters at a
senior center in Des Moines . `` But when you have a debate or you go
on television , sure , it 's a performance . ''

With their willingness to engage voters one-on-one , Bradley and
Republican Sen. John McCain have been the trend-setters of this
presidential campaign , prompting other candidates to take more
questions from audiences and affect a more relaxed approach . These
underdogs have also leapfrogged their parties ' front-runners to
take the lead in recent polls in New Hampshire , where this style of
personal campaigning has the biggest impact . They moved decisively
ahead in New Hampshire the week the two met in a cross-party
photo-op to re-enact the Bill Clinton-Newt Gingrich handshake
agreement to do something about campaign finance reform .

With Christmas only days and a bitter cold front settled in ,
Bradley was campaigning around Des Moines the following week ,
hoping to put pressure on Gore in the other key early state . The
groups were larger than earlier in the campaign , so a staffer cut
off questions after a while at each meeting . But Bradley still got
in lots of dialogue in sessions at a suburban library , a children 's
hospital , an Irish bar and several other stops .

Bradley is the only presidential candidate who has pointedly
refused to discuss his religion , and yet when he talks about his
desire to `` move our collective humanity a few feet forward '' and
realize `` a world of new possibilities guided by goodness , '' his
stump speech arcs toward a sort of civic mysticism .

`` Whenever I see somebody who can look beneath skin color or eye
shape and see the individual , I think all of us could be that
good , '' he tells voters . `` Whenever I see a neighbor give to
another neighbor , with no expectation of return , I think more of us
more often could be that good . ... Whenever someone has courage to
stand up against an evil ... that single action strengthens all of
us . ''

The cadence bears more than a little similarity to Tom Joad 's
ringing words at the conclusion of John Steinbeck 's `` Grapes of
Wrath . '' It 's a broad , Rooseveltian language of Democratic ideals
that also punctuates Bradley 's account of growing up on the
Mississippi in Crystal City , Mo. , the only child of a doting
teacher and a bank officer with calcified arthritis who prided
himself that he never foreclosed on a family during the Depression .

It 's in the best tradition of the Democratic Party , Bradley told
voters who turned out in subzero weather to see him at the Perry
library , to propose doing things `` in a timely enough manner and a
big enough way . '' The economic boom makes this the time , he
asserted , for the party and the country to `` think big . ''

That philosophy rings through in his discussion of almost every
issue .

On health care : `` If you have a problem that size , you need a
big solution . '' Gun control : `` If you 're serious about this , you
have to offer a strong proposal . '' Campaign finance reform : `` The
level of boldness and depth of commitment is the biggest difference
-LRB- between him and Gore -RRB- . ''

At the children 's hospital , Bradley acknowledged that his
proposals to broaden health care coverage are `` not cheap . It will
cost between $ 55 billion and $ 60 billion a year . '' He would fund
this and other spending on social needs by keeping defense spending
at a steady rate , rather than increasing spending as Gore and all
the Republicans have proposed .

Asked how he would get the programs through if the Republicans
hold on to a congressional majority , Bradley noted that `` some of
my best moments , '' including the 1986 tax reform legislation he
sponsored , were in a Republican-majority Senate . He also cited
Ronald Reagan as a case for swaying Congress by campaigning with a
clearly drawn platform .

`` Being specific is the beginning of a legislative strategy , ''
he said . Like Reagan , he envisions an administration of bold
colors , in which the president points the way but limits himself to
a few vital objectives .

In Reagan 's administration , everyone knew they had to be
anti-Communist and pro-defense to please the boss , Bradley told a
Democratic audience . In his administration , people would know that
if they want to please the boss , they 'll have to promote racial
harmony .

It was a speech on racial matters that spurred interest in
Bradley as a presidential candidate , and he talks about the
subject , as he points out , even in places such as Iowa , where the
crowds may be all white .

`` My belief is that way over 50 percent of the white people in
America want to have a deeper level of racial harmony in this
country . If I 'm wrong , I 'm toast . If I 'm right , we have to put
together the ingredients for a real transformation , '' Bradley said .

The stump speech biography , which begins with small-town
Missouri , ends with an anecdote about tossing uncomfortably on a
motel bed one night earlier in this campaign .

`` It came to me , '' he tells voters , after describing the various
discomforts that kept him up , `` that I 'd been on the road in
America for 30 years , as a basketball player , as a politician , as a
businessman . And in all those years there is one continuum , and
that is me going out and asking strangers to tell me their stories .
In the accumulation of all those stories , I think I have a pretty
good sense of who the American people are . ''

The words make an effective lead into the trademark
question-and-answer period . Whether Bradley can translate this
style into a broader medium when the race explodes into a
fast-paced competition for the big states will determine his
chances for the nomination . But for now his laid-back delivery and
unabashedly liberal message have Bradley 's campaign on a hot
streak .

Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

Bradley 's easygoing style wins rave reviews in presidential run

Something about putting on shorts for years
and dribbling a ball before thousands changes the way a performer
reacts in front of crowds .

The tension of stage fright _ common among those who act , play
the concert piano or , in most cases , run for public office _ is
missing . The muscles do n't tighten in the same way and the face
assumes a loose , locker-room quality of disregard for the attention
being focused on it .

As much as any of the traditional Democratic initiatives he
proposes in his platform , this low-key demeanor , epitomized by the
throat lozenge tumbling constantly in his mouth during his
speeches , distinguishes former Sen. Bill Bradley out on the stump .

Bradley tells audiences the `` radical premise '' of his campaign
is that he can go out and simply tell people what he believes `` and
have a chance of winning . '' The style in which he outlines these
beliefs matters as well .

At times , Bradley 's steadfast refusal to hit rhetorical high
notes can be frustrating . In a room like the one filled with Jewish
voters at a recent conference in Atlanta , there 's a sense of
listeners waiting for a resolving chord that does n't sound .

But when he connects , his manner gives him the freedom to do
things that draw a sharp c with Vice President Al Gore 's
stiff reputation .

`` No ! '' his face wrapped around the microphone in mock shock
when an Iowa voter mentions some new charge Gore has made .
Discussing the evils of political money , he wheels his 6-foot-5
frame around , pretending to kick a lobbyist in the rear .

Voters , especially liberal Democrats longing to hear their
ideals voiced again , frequently walk away saying things like `` one
of us , '' `` straightforward , '' `` has his feet on the ground . ''

`` Performer , '' by the way , is a word Bradley himself uses in
talking about what a politician does . But he makes a careful
distinction .

`` What I was doing out there was not a performance , it was a
dialogue , '' the Rhodes scholar , New York Knicks star and New Jersey
Democrat said last week after meeting with a group of voters at a
senior center in Des Moines . `` But when you have a debate or you go
on television , sure , it 's a performance . ''

With their willingness to engage voters one-on-one , Bradley and
Republican Sen. John McCain have been the trend-setters of this
presidential campaign , prompting other candidates to take more
questions from audiences and affect a more relaxed approach . These
underdogs have also leapfrogged their parties ' front-runners to
take the lead in recent polls in New Hampshire , where this style of
personal campaigning has the biggest impact . They moved decisively
ahead in New Hampshire the week the two met in a cross-party
photo-op to re-enact the Bill Clinton-Newt Gingrich handshake
agreement to do something about campaign finance reform .

With Christmas only days and a bitter cold front settled in ,
Bradley was campaigning around Des Moines the following week ,
hoping to put pressure on Gore in the other key early state . The
groups were larger than earlier in the campaign , so a staffer cut
off questions after a while at each meeting . But Bradley still got
in lots of dialogue in sessions at a suburban library , a children 's
hospital , an Irish bar and several other stops .

Bradley is the only presidential candidate who has pointedly
refused to discuss his religion , and yet when he talks about his
desire to `` move our collective humanity a few feet forward '' and
realize `` a world of new possibilities guided by goodness , '' his
stump speech arcs toward a sort of civic mysticism .

`` Whenever I see somebody who can look beneath skin color or eye
shape and see the individual , I think all of us could be that
good , '' he tells voters . `` Whenever I see a neighbor give to
another neighbor , with no expectation of return , I think more of us
more often could be that good . ... Whenever someone has courage to
stand up against an evil ... that single action strengthens all of
us . ''

The cadence bears more than a little similarity to Tom Joad 's
ringing words at the conclusion of John Steinbeck 's `` Grapes of
Wrath . '' It 's a broad , Rooseveltian language of Democratic ideals
that also punctuates Bradley 's account of growing up on the
Mississippi in Crystal City , Mo. , the only child of a doting
teacher and a bank officer with calcified arthritis who prided
himself that he never foreclosed on a family during the Depression .

It 's in the best tradition of the Democratic Party , Bradley told
voters who turned out in subzero weather to see him at the Perry
library , to propose doing things `` in a timely enough manner and a
big enough way . '' The economic boom makes this the time , he
asserted , for the party and the country to `` think big . ''

That philosophy rings through in his discussion of almost every
issue .

On health care : `` If you have a problem that size , you need a
big solution . '' Gun control : `` If you 're serious about this , you
have to offer a strong proposal . '' Campaign finance reform : `` The
level of boldness and depth of commitment is the biggest difference
-LRB- between him and Gore -RRB- . ''

At the children 's hospital , Bradley acknowledged that his
proposals to broaden health care coverage are `` not cheap . It will
cost between $ 55 billion and $ 60 billion a year . '' He would fund
this and other spending on social needs by keeping defense spending
at a steady rate , rather than increasing spending as Gore and all
the Republicans have proposed .

Asked how he would get the programs through if the Republicans
hold on to a congressional majority , Bradley noted that `` some of
my best moments , '' including the 1986 tax reform legislation he
sponsored , were in a Republican-majority Senate . He also cited
Ronald Reagan as a case for swaying Congress by campaigning with a
clearly drawn platform .

`` Being specific is the beginning of a legislative strategy , ''
he said . Like Reagan , he envisions an administration of bold
colors , in which the president points the way but limits himself to
a few vital objectives .

In Reagan 's administration , everyone knew they had to be
anti-Communist and pro-defense to please the boss , Bradley told a
Democratic audience . In his administration , people would know that
if they want to please the boss , they 'll have to promote racial
harmony .

It was a speech on racial matters that spurred interest in
Bradley as a presidential candidate , and he talks about the
subject , as he points out , even in places such as Iowa , where the
crowds may be all white .

`` My belief is that way over 50 percent of the white people in
America want to have a deeper level of racial harmony in this
country . If I 'm wrong , I 'm toast . If I 'm right , we have to put
together the ingredients for a real transformation , '' Bradley said .

The stump speech biography , which begins with small-town
Missouri , ends with an anecdote about tossing uncomfortably on a
motel bed one night earlier in this campaign .

`` It came to me , '' he tells voters , after describing the various
discomforts that kept him up , `` that I 'd been on the road in
America for 30 years , as a basketball player , as a politician , as a
businessman . And in all those years there is one continuum , and
that is me going out and asking strangers to tell me their stories .
In the accumulation of all those stories , I think I have a pretty
good sense of who the American people are . ''

The words make an effective lead into the trademark
question-and-answer period . Whether Bradley can translate this
style into a broader medium when the race explodes into a
fast-paced competition for the big states will determine his
chances for the nomination . But for now his laid-back delivery and
unabashedly liberal message have Bradley 's campaign on a hot
streak .

Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

Payment in stock a way of linking performance to future growth

At Atlanta-based Red Hot Law Group of Ashley , every
one of the firm 's 19 employees _ from receptionist to attorneys _
is poised to share future wealth .

The firm , which serves emerging high-tech firms through its
Technology Accelerator unit , collects 5 percent of its high-tech
clients ' stock as part of its fee package and then distributes 15
percent of the total as stock options among Red Hot employees . If
one of the Accelerator clients hits it big one day , so will the
options holders at Red Hot .

`` It could be an amazingly lucrative event , '' explains Evelyn A.
Ashley , Red Hot managing partner . `` The upside is for the future .
In a way , we 're placing ourselves in a position where we truly are
partners with the clients we accept . ''

The firm is also positioning itself in the middle of a growing
trend among employers across the United States who are using stock
options as performance incentive compensation , as well as a tool
for recruitment and retention . While employers are offering annual
salary increases in the 4 percent range on average , stock options
are an additional means for future financial payoff , a way of
linking employee performance to future business growth .

Formerly an exclusive benefit for big-time executives , stock
option awards continue to migrate down the corporate ladder as more
and more companies expose a wider selection of employees to the
potential payoff in the record-setting bull market .

Fully 62 percent of the companies polled by the American
Compensation Association 's 1999-2000 Total Salary Increase Budget
Survey reported some form of stock-based compensation plan .

Atlanta-area high-tech firms and their Silicon Valley brethren
are among the leading industries offering stock options as part of
employee compensation .

However , many companies outside the technology marketplace are
using options to attract and retain workers in the current
low-unemployment , high-competition job market .

`` We 're seeing options going lower in the organization , '' says
David Leach , national director of the Compensation Consulting
Practice at New York-based Buck Consultants . `` More companies are
offering -LRB- stock -RRB- options to more and more employees . ''

Stock options are awards that permit an employee to purchase a
share of the company stock for less than market prices . For
example , Coca-Cola Chairman-to-be Douglas Daft recently spent
$ 1,152,800 to exercise options entitling him to purchase 120,000
shares of the soft drink maker 's stock at $ 9.30 and $ 9.76 per
share . Coke shares were trading at $ 59 at the time .

The employee is often able to sell the stock at market prices ,
netting a handsome profit .

Companies use options to tie the employees ' financial stake to
that of the shareholders . By increasing shareholder value , the
employees increase the amount of money they will net when their
options mature , typically over a 10-year time frame .

`` The market has done well for the last six years , so it 's
almost a given that if people get stock options , they 're going to
be making money , '' says Leach .

Of course , a big payoff is not guaranteed . Stock options are
best issued as long-term incentives and should not be viewed as
quick cash payouts .

At Red Hot , only two companies have graduated from the
Technology Accelerator since it was launched in May . It could be
years before those options are liquidated , Ashley says .

`` The way lawyer compensation has been done traditionally , it 's
very oriented to what I get today , '' she says . `` What we 're trying
to do is to get lawyers in particular to think beyond today . ''

In some cases , options have made people rich . For start-up and
hot-growth companies , options are often used in lieu of cash at
companies that can not pay big salaries . If these firms go public ,
options holders often net huge cash windfalls or on-paper increases
when their options are converted for stock in public equity
markets .

For larger , more established companies such as Coca-Cola , Home
Depot and others , stock options are used to lure and keep top
performers .

`` They need to attract and retain quality people to help them
run their businesses , '' explains Leach . `` For them to do that , they
have to have a competitive compensation package . That means
offering stock . ''

They also play a direct role in tying a manager 's overall
compensation to that of the average shareholder . There is , however ,
risk associated with these rewards . They only pay off if the stock
price rises above the option price . If the market price per share
slips below the option price , the options are deemed `` under
water , '' an event that could waterlog the employee morale the
incentive seeks to encourage .

`` If the market goes down and all these people are sitting on
stocks that are worthless , it 's going to be more negative than
having '' the options in the first place , reasons Leach . `` You
raised -LRB- employee -RRB- expectations when you granted them . Now they 're
not worth anything . Their morale is going to be lower than if they
never got anything at all . ''

Still , in today 's seemingly unending bull market , employers are
betting on the upside , awarding stock options to employees who just
a few years ago were cut out of this form of compensation .

`` This is considered a reward , '' says Dotty Pritchett , managing
partner with Lucas Group , an Atlanta-based executive search firm .
`` It 's not just a benefit that you just have , '' she adds .

Take corporate attorneys . A few years ago , options awards for
in-house corporate lawyers were rare . Rarer still were stock
options used for incentive pay for paralegals , but that is changing
swiftly , Pritchett says . In the past year , she has noticed not only
more corporate attorneys negotiating stock options in their
compensation packages , but paralegals , as well .

`` Employers , my clients , recognize how important -LRB- stock options -RRB-
are , and that it is of great interest to the job candidate , '' says
Pritchett .

Should you be getting stock options ? Talk with your immediate
supervisor , advises Leach . Find out the eligibility requirements .
`` Sometimes , these could be personal performance issues , so one
wants to talk to individual managers about it , '' he says . `` Since
there 's only so much stock to go around , the company wants to make
certain they 're spending these in the right place to get the best
for their investments , -LRB- awarding them to -RRB- the best performers . ''

Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

LACK OF MAJOR COMPUTER PROBLEMS WAS NO ACCIDENT , EXPERTS SAY

Now that the Year 2000 has arrived around the world without
significant disruptions of power , transportation , commerce and
other activities dependent on computers , the question arises : Was
the threat of technology failure overstated , or was it all those
hundreds of billions of dollars that were spent to fix things that
prevented a catastrophe ?

Most computer experts insist that the problem was a widespread
and major threat before work began . `` There was puffery by vendors
and some money was wasted , but these were real problems , '' said
Leon Kappelman , a University of North Texas associate professor of
business and co-chairman of the Society for Information
Management 's Year 2000 Working Group .

Many also warned Saturday that significant problems could still
emerge in the months to come if less critical or less frequently
used computers , programs or microchips belatedly become confused .
And little of the world 's vast array of financial and office
computing systems will face real-world Year 2000 conditions until
business resumes Monday .

`` Probably 10 percent of the world 's computer systems had a
workout at the gym this weekend , but 90 percent did not , '' said
Howard Rubin , chairman of the department of computer science at
Hunter College in New York and an international expert on the Year
2000 computer problem . `` The statistics say there 's still got to be
something out there that 's wrong . It 'll take weeks , perhaps a full
year , to understand the full impact . ''

Still , some computer experts , like William Wattenburg , who
developed an automated program to deal with Year 2000 flaws , were
saying the quiet rollover was predictable and that the dangers had
been wildly exaggerated .

And charges were flying Saturday from individuals who had
expected the worse .

`` Why did we fall for this hype ? '' a correspondent in an
Internet discussion group devoted to Year 2000 issues wrote
Saturday . `` I feel cheated , betrayed , misused , abused , deceived and
everything else ! '' The note was signed , `` Gullible . ''

Year 2000 project managers looking ahead to the start of normal
business on Monday warned that it was far too soon to relax .
Thousands of workers spent the early hours of Saturday retesting
systems needed for office operations once the holiday weekend ends .

The results constituted more good news . For instance , the
Securities Industry Association , a trade group , said Saturday that
the stock exchanges and support organizations had discovered and
quickly fixed glitches that caused `` 1900 '' to appear on some
printed forms .

But the overall good news was not being interpreted as evidence
that the huge precautionary investments had been unnecessary . `` Had
we not fixed our code and done the level of testing and gone out
and gotten outside auditors , we would definitely have had
failures , '' said Gary Davis , the Year 2000 director for New York
state , which spent about $ 270 million on the problem . `` There 's a
whole laundry list of silver linings . ''

For example , like most major computer users , New York ended up
doing a thorough inventory of the state 's technological
underpinnings . `` Lots of our technology was 10 years old , some even
two decades old , '' Davis said . `` It all really needed upgrading and
now we 're in a much better position to deliver better services to
New Yorkers . ''

John A. Koskinen , chairman of the President 's Council on Year
2000 Conversion , added his voice at a 2 a.m. press conference
Saturday to those denying that the United States had been chasing a
mirage rather than a real threat _ even though other nations that
spent far less seemed to encounter no significant difficulties .

Koskinen said that the United States , as the nation most
dependent on computers , needed to spend the most to avoid
disruptions . If the news remains good , he said , `` It will reflect
the success of a unique , massive cooperative effort . ''

Computer experts said the United States had benefited in
numerous ways from its heavy spending _ pegged at $ 100 billion by
the government and several times that amount by some private
analysts . One of the most important ways , some said , was a
recognition by business and government leaders that computers and
software must be more carefully managed .

Rubin termed the rollover an `` extraordinary success '' after a
belated start working on Year 2000 programming flaws . But such slow
reactions may not be correctible in the future , he warned .

`` When computers are in your face _ when you have an Internet
refrigerator _ you wo n't be able to take that kind of chance , '' he
said . `` Soon , Earth will have an Internet skin . This skin will be a
critical thing . As everything becomes more responsive in real time ,
the technological risks get higher . ''

Others said the investment laid the groundwork for some
fascinating case studies in technology management . Companies like
Delta Airlines , which expects to spend up to $ 120 million ,
according to filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission ,
made Year 2000 investments part of a broader deployment of new
technology that could give the company a competitive advantage in
the future , according to Kappelman .

Around the globe , government officials felt an obligation to
defend their spending as most computers and related systems
functioned well as the year changed .

`` There is a certain sense of wry anticlimax out there , '' said
Michael Granatt , a director of the British government 's millennium
center , as he listed a few of the glitches that came to light as
2000 dawned , including temporary breakdowns in fare collection
systems on trams in Sydney and Adelaide , Australia , and the failure
of a tide gauge in Porstmouth , England .

But he said it was important to acknowledge that the lack of
truly disastrous computer failures was not a fluke . `` Things do n't
go right by accident , '' he said . `` They go right through proper
planning . ''

INDIA HINTS THAT PAKISTAN WAS BEHIND HIJACKING

The more than 150 hostages freed Friday from
a hijacked Indian Airlines jet savored the simple pleasures on
Saturday that had been denied them for the past week : taking a
shower , sleeping with their legs outstretched and eating a
home-cooked meal .

As the hostages took their first steps back to normal life ,
India 's top diplomat took the offensive . Foreign Minister Jaswant
Singh defended the government 's much-criticized decision to make a
deal with the hijackers _ winning the hostages ' freedom by
releasing three jailed militants _ and hinted darkly that India 's
archrival , Pakistan , was behind this latest terrorist act .

Singh opened his wrap-up news conference on the hijacking by
listing a string of accusations that implicated Pakistan . The
hijackers were Pakistanis , he said . Most of the 36 militants they
wanted released were Pakistanis , he added .

And the hijackers and three terror suspects whom India handed
over to them on the tarmac in Kandahar , Afghanistan _ where the
crisis ended _ had headed for Quetta , Pakistan , he said . To back up
that assertion , he cited remarks attributed to an official in the
Taliban , which rules most of Afghanistan , in a Pakistani newspaper .

But when he was asked directly if he believed the government of
Pakistan had sponsored the terrorists , Singh said , `` I 'll not
comment authoritatively on that . ''

While Singh did not make public any evidence to support his
charges , his remarks made it clear that the ill will between the
neighboring nuclear-armed nations is unabated since they clashed
this summer over Kashmir , the Himalayan territory that each seeks
for its own .

The hijacking has become one more episode to aggravate feelings
between the two countries .

The masked hijackers , who never revealed their names ,
nationalities or faces , told the hostages that they were Muslims
who sought independence from Indian rule for predominantly Muslim
Kashmir .

Now that the hostages , most of them Indians , are heading home ,
attention has shifted to where they have really gone .

The Taliban gave them 10 hours to get out of Afghanistan after
the hijacking ended on Friday .

When they came down the ladder from the Airbus , they and the
three released militants got into a four-wheel-drive vehicle and
drove away . The drive to Pakistan from Kandahar is about five
hours , and it is 12 to 14 hours to the Iranian border .

Singh said the men had headed to Pakistan , and he may well be
right . But the Pakistani government said it did not want them to
enter .

Brig. Rashid Qureshi , spokesman for the military government in
Pakistan , said Saturday that the Taliban had never sought
permission from Pakistan for the hijackers to go to Pakistan , nor
would it have been given .

`` If you heard the statement yesterday from our minister of
foreign affairs , we have said that Pakistan is greatly relieved
that the hijacking has ended without bloodshed , '' he said , `` and he
emphasized that the punishment for hijackers here in Pakistan is
capital punishment . I do not expect that after such a statement had
been issued that the hijackers would risk coming to Pakistan . ''

He also said that Pakistan had increased its border patrols in
recent months but has made no special provisions to stop the
hijackers . `` I do n't expect it is very easy for the hijackers to
come across the border , but while I say this , I have to add that we
can not patrol every inch of the border , '' he said .

-LRB- STORY CAN END HERE _ OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS -RRB-

While Singh pointed to the Taliban 's information minister as
having said that the hijackers were headed to Quetta , Mullah
Muhammad Omar , the Taliban 's supreme leader , told the newspaper New
in Pakistan that they were likely to go to Kashmir .

`` We have refused them political asylum , '' he said . `` As they
claim to be Kashmiris , they could go back to Kashmir .

`` As the hijackers were masked and are unknown , they may be able
to disappear without being detected , '' he said .

Indeed , the men may be difficult to trace . Border crossings
between Afghanistan and Pakistan are loosely patrolled , with a sea
of humanity crossing the rutted roads in both directions largely
unimpeded . The crossings are traffic jams of trucks , donkey carts
and men carrying huge loads on their backs .

Almost everyone is bearded and wearing the traditional salwar
kameez pants and tunic and a turban . In the winter , as the winds
sweep in off the stark mountains , most men cover their heads and
faces with blankets and scarves , making the task of detecting
hijackers that much more difficult .

Singh said that India was convinced that the hijackers are
headed to Pakistan .

Asked if India would seek the men 's extradition , Singh said ,
`` We will be taking it up with Pakistan in the appropriate fashion
and at the appropriate time . ''

AT-HOME FATHERS STEP OUT TO FIND THEY ARE NOT ALONE -LRB- jw -RRB-

In a gray lecture hall in the Oakton
Community College , a group of middle-aged men were shouting
affirmations .

`` Who ARE you ? '' their cheerleader , Hogan Hilling , asked them .

`` Proud dads ! '' they replied .

`` What time is it ? ''

`` It 's DAD time ! ''

To further raise the room 's esteem , Hilling instructed the men
to raise one hand in the air , then bring it down into a clenched
fist with a rousing `` Yes ! ''

The `` Yes ! '' fist pump was the support-group chant of choice at
the recent At-Home Dads Convention in this Chicago suburb . A day of
seminars on topics like `` At-Home Daddying ... What Are Our
Issues ? '' and `` The Anatomy of a Working Mom 's Brain '' drew about
85 men from 20 states . Many of the attendees , a small group with a
broad constituency , run Web sites , newsletters and play groups that
cater to men whose wives bring home the reduced-fat bacon .

No longer the butt of demeaning `` Mr. Mom '' jokes , these men
have become familiar figures at playgrounds and PTA meetings . They
have `` come out of the pantry , '' some of them like to say , with a
newly emboldened attitude , in a men 's movement with a new idea of
masculinity . Ironing John . And conventions like this one and the
Internet have become their sweatlodge .

Dozens of virtual kaffeeklatsches have sprung up for men who by
choice or economic necessity find themselves on the daddytrack .
Among them are Daddyshome.com , MrMomz.com , Athomedad.com and the
Parent Soup section of America Online . On Slowlane.com , the
slickest and most complete of the sites , the slogan is , `` You are
not alone . ''

At the convention , men who had known one another only by e-mail
met for the first time . Attendance has increased from 35 in the
group 's first year but is down from 100 last year . Christopher
Coby , 35 , said connecting with other fathers like him through the
Internet had pulled him out of his version of postpartum funk .

`` I had two kids in diapers at once and I was fried , '' said
Coby , who lives in Wake Forest , N.C. `` I was online and I kind of
came out of lurk mode and got on a couple of lists . ''

That saved him , he said : `` I came here to meet the guys face to
face and just say thanks . ''

Coby is 6-foot-2 , weighs 215 pounds and is a former tank
commander in the Army reserves . He quit teaching elementary school
after his son was born because his wife , who works for a consulting
firm , had a higher salary and better benefits .

He proudly wears an apron that his wife gave him last Father 's
Day that says , `` Women want me , Martha Stewart fears me . ''

How many Chris Cobys are out there is unclear . The Census
Bureau 's last survey on the subject , in 1993 , reported that 1.9
million unemployed men were the primary caretakers of children up
to 14 years old , down from a recession high of more than 2 million
in 1991 . A Bureau of Labor Statistics study released in September
showed that , from 1991 to 1996 , unemployed men ages 25 to 54 who
chose not to look for work because of `` home responsibilities ''
rose to 8.4 percent from 4.6 percent .

That change is significant , experts say , because men have
traditionally been unwilling to admit household duties as the
reason for their unemployment .

James Levine , director of the Fatherhood Project at the Families
and Work Institute in New York , said , `` The number of men at home
taking care of their kids is the best-kept secret in American child
care . '' Many of them , he said , are blue collar : `` cops and firemen
working night shifts while their wives work days . '' Such men are
not unemployed and may not consider themselves stay-at-home
fathers .

Levine believes there has been a `` quantum leap '' in the numbers
of stay-at-home fathers since he researched his book , `` Who Will
Raise the Children ? New Options for Fathers and Mothers , '' 25 years
ago . `` They were really few and far between then , '' he said . `` It
was considered nuts . ''

Still far from the norm , stay-at-home fathers are gaining
acceptance . Even approval . In his new book , `` Fatherneed '' -LRB- Free
Press -RRB- , Dr. Kyle Pruett , a clinical professor of psychology at the
Yale Child Studies Center , found slightly above-average
intellectual , social and emotional development among a small group
of children reared by stay-at-home fathers . He followed the
families for 10 years .

Among the pop-cultural barometers of shifting breadwinner roles
is a pilot to be shot this month for a midseason sitcom called
`` Daddio , '' produced by Disney for NBC , about one such man . Matt
Berry , an executive producer of the show , stayed home with his
children during his 15 years working nights as a stand-up comedian .
He said he and his writing partner had pitched the idea to networks
before , unsuccessfully because the reaction was always , `` but
people wo n't respect him as a man , '' he said . `` And we were like ,
` Why is that a tainted concept ? Why ca n't he be a man because he
decided to stay home full-time with his kids ? ' ''

Nonetheless , men who stay home still face a problem well known
to women in the same position : isolation .

Dr. Robert Frank , a psychologist who has organized these
conventions for the last four years , conducted a study in 1996 of
371 fathers who identified themselves as their children 's `` primary
caregivers . '' Of those , 63 percent said they felt isolated , versus
37 percent of mothers in the same position .

-LRB- MORE -RRB-

nn

DES PLAINES , Ill. : same position .

The isolation manifests itself in many ways . Loneliness ,
depression , stir-craziness that some men described as `` bouncing
off the walls . '' And the familiar corollary of all these problems :
weight gain .

In a small discussion group , Vince Gratton , a former prosecutor
from Pueblo , Colo. , with three girls -LRB- one 9 and 3-year-old twins -RRB-
said he had started working out . `` I 've been weight-training for
four months , '' he said . `` I can bench 265 and squat 400 and I 'm
gon na crush the next guy who says , ` What do you do ? '' '

Gratton , 56 , said he had to go all the way to Chicago to find
another stay-at-home dad from his hometown . `` Now I got this big
guy here , who 's sensitive and loving , '' Gratton said gruffly ,
motioning to another burly man in an aviator jacket . But no one
else , he said . `` I live in a steel town where manly men do manly
things . ''

The tables in the classroom were pushed together to encourage
intimacy . Experiences of a so-called `` glass wall '' separating
mothers from fathers in parks and schoolyards echoed around the
room . Edward Howard , 54 , said , `` I go to the playground with my son
and I 'm tired of being looked at as some kind of sexual pervert . ''

Equally frustrating as feeling frozen out for these men is being
condescended to . Jim DiCenzo said the principal of his child 's
school in San Diego told him , `` I think it 's so cute that you stay
home with your kids . '' His reaction : `` I could have strangled
her . ''

Still , some of them said , better to drive to a distant Burger
King for a play date with another stay-at-home father than endure
the awkwardness or boredom of the company of women . One man , who
asked not to be named , said , `` I do n't want to sit around and talk
for an hour about shopping or listening to them complain about
their husbands . ''

The occasional retrograde comment aside , most of the
convention 's attendees regard themselves as fully evolved males , in
touch with their nurturing sides .

After screening his 22-minute documentary film `` Homedaddy , ''
Kent Ayyildiz told his rapt audience , `` The gains women have made
in the workplace should be balanced by men making the same gains in
the house . '' As the closing credits rolled , the audience whooped
its approval and gave the ponytailed Ayyildiz a standing ovation .
They cheered again when he said he no longer identified himself as
a filmmaker who also happens to stay home with his child , but as a
`` homedaddy '' who also happens to make films .

Even so , Ayyildiz admitted to a certain ambivalence about
putting child rearing first . `` These are the growing years of my
career , '' he said . `` At the same time , I get one chance with my
son . ''

Chris Cooper , who has published a compendium of essays called
`` The At-Home Dad Handbook , '' said he was working at Athlete 's Foot
in Atlanta and his wife at UPS when they had their first child .

`` We did n't want to go the day care route and with her having
the better salary potential , we decided I 'd quit work and stay
home , '' said Cooper , who now has two children , ages 6 and 5 , and
lives in St. Paul , Minn. . In 1997 , he started a group called
Dad-to-Dad , which now has chapters nationwide .

`` Now that I can be home with the kids , I look at things
differently from when I was single or just married , '' he said .
`` Then I was career-driven and work meant pretty much everything to
me . Now my kids are my life and raising them is what I consider my
` career . ' ''

-LRB- BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB-

Ed Steffek , a former math teacher , said had listed `` homemaker ''
as his profession on his daughter 's birth certificate .

-LRB- END OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB-

The commitment to being a good parent outweighed other forms of
housework for many men at the convention . Peter Baylies , publisher
of the At-Home Dad newsletter and Web site , recalled that some
adjustment was required when he and his wife traded places .

`` After a couple of months she said , ` When are you gon na clean
the bathroom ? ' I was humiliated . I did n't care if the bathroom was
clean . It did n't make any difference to me . ''

Peter Hoh , husband of a nurse in St. Paul , Minn. , expressed a
similar attitude toward what used to be called women 's work .
`` People say , ` Your wife works . You stay home . Who cleans the
house ? ' And the answer , when people open the door , is clearly ,
` Nobody ! '' '

-LRB- BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB-

The cleaning issue came up in Joanne Massey 's seminar , `` The
Anatomy of a Working Woman 's Mom . '' Her husband , Jay Massey , runs
Slowlane.com and a Web site design company from their house in
Pensacola , Fla. . That makes him a `` work-at-home dad , '' she said .

Ms. Massey , the only woman participating in the convention , told
the audience that her husband 's workday begins when hers ends . As a
result , `` Mom has to clean up when I come home , '' she said . `` That
was hard to adjust to . ''

She also said when she had asked their 5-year-old son what he
wanted to be when he grows up , he said , `` I want to be an at-home
dad . '' That got a big , fist-pumping `` Yes ! ''

-LRB- END OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB-

In defense of their lifestyle choice , the at-home fathers often
point out that before the industrial revolution , children were
accustomed to having their fathers around , on the farm or in the
blacksmith shop .

`` Ten years ago , it was considered freakish , '' said Baylies ,
looking around at the clusters of conventioneers gathered for a
lunch of pasta and salad . `` You 'll know that stay-at-home dads are
totally accepted when we do n't have to do this . ''

ANALYSIS : A KEY TO PUTIN 'S PLANS IS AN INTOLERANCE FOR CORRUPTION

Only Vladimir Putin knows for certain where he wants to
take Russia as the nation 's acting president . But if his visit last
week to the Railways Ministry is any indication , Russia may be in
for an interesting trip indeed .

As the Moscow daily Kommersant reported , Putin performed the
rote ceremonial duties at a packed meeting of ministry employees
eight days ago , doling out awards and praising the railroads '
contribution to the economy .

But then his tone turned icy . Why , he asked , did the railroads
beseech the Kremlin for money when certain customers got special
shipping discounts ? And was it not odd that the ministry had
granted certain unnamed people the rights to collect a mountain of
unpaid freight bills ? And why was the ministry buying rails from
Japan when Russia 's steel mills were idle and offering fire-sale
prices ?

Then he left , even before the flustered deputy prime minister
for industrial policy could read remarks congratulating the Kremlin
on its victory in that week 's parliamentary elections .

The extraordinary scene suggests there is more than one way to
look at Putin 's pledge , made even before he became president on
Friday , to restore a strong central government to Russia .

Among Westerners , that promise mostly raises fears of a
crackdown on civil liberties or a return to authoritarian rule ,
fears fanned by Putin 's direction of the savage war in Chechnya .
But his admirers insist that what he truly wants to subjugate is
the untamed and fantastically corrupt Russian bureaucracy and
economy .

There is little doubt which is the tougher task . President Boris
Yeltsin held immense power , but under his rule the ties between the
Kremlin and major state agencies , provincial governments and
industries steadily atrophied .

The national tolerance of corruption _ bribes , after all , were
sometimes the only way to accomplish anything under Soviet rule _
allowed bureaucrats to ignore Moscow 's dictates and to accumulate
fortunes at the same time .

Moreover , much of the bureaucracy remains under the control of
Soviet-era bureaucrats who are either ideologically opposed to the
Kremlin or simply indifferent to its demands .

`` To this day , the power structures of our country remain ,
according to the method of work and the personnel that they have ,
in conflict with the new regime , '' said Anatoly A. Sobchak , the
former St. Petersburg mayor who is regarded as Putin 's mentor .
`` These are n't democratic structures that live in a democratic
state and are merely in opposition to the democratic state . ''

The new president , he said , `` is capable of making these power
structures loyal and to make them work for the new democratic
Russia . ''

Russians have heard all this before , of course , as recently as
1991 , and it has yet to come to pass . And Russians have swallowed
promises of strong , benevolent and progressive rule , from Nicholas
II to Stalin , only to see them end up in chaos or autocracy or
both .

The new president will inherit near-dictatorial powers in the
constitution which his predecessor , Boris Yeltsin , pushed into law
after thwarting a communist-led coup in 1993 . Yeltsin never fully
used those powers , either because of physical or political
infirmity or out of a belief they were not needed .

Putin says he does not believe a new constitution is needed now .
But he also has indicated that he wants to make changes through the
system using the new plurality he won in parliament in last month 's
elections .

Putin indicates in his own writings that he believes Russia
can not enter the ranks of advanced nations until it roots out
Soviet traditions and bridges the ideological divide that pits the
communist third of the nation against the democratic remainder .

In a special document , `` Russia at the turn of the millennium , ''
published on a Kremlin internet site
-LRB- www.pravitelstvo.gov.ru/english/statVPengl1.html -RRB- , he said that
Russia would be mistaken not to recognize communism 's
accomplishments . `` But it would be an even bigger mistake not to
realize the outrageous price our country and its people had to pay
for that Bolshevist experiment .

`` Russia needs a strong state power and must have it , '' he
wrote . But a strong state , he added , means `` a law-based , workable
federative state . '' And crucial to that , he added , are a
streamlined and corruption-free bureaucracy , a merit system for
hiring and rewarding government workers , a more powerful judiciary
and closer ties between Moscow and its regions .

Putin backed up his call for reform with some sobering
statistics : Even if Russia 's per-person gross domestic product were
to rise by 8 percent per year for the next 15 years , he wrote , the
nation would still only reach the level of present-day Portugal .

Achieving the level of Britain or France would require a 10
percent annual growth rate _ and even then , Britain or France would
have to stand still .

Investment has dwindled : Only 4.5 percent of the nation 's
industrial equipment was less than five years old in 1998 , compared
with nearly 30 percent in 1990 . Except in the electricity and
raw-material industries , individual productivity is one quarter of
that in the United States .

-LRB- MORE -RRB-

nn

MOSCOW : United States .

Such shortcomings can be overcome , he said , but only by devising
and swiftly carrying out a plan for the nation 's restructuring and
recovery . `` The paramount word is fast , '' he wrote , `` and we have
no time for a slow start . ''

Sobchak , who recruited Putin to a team of economic experts when
he was St. Petersburg 's reformist mayor in the early 1990s , said
the new president would benefit from his years as an intelligence
agent in East Germany , where he was in regular contact with Western
businesses and governments .

`` He is a convinced supporter of the market economy , '' Sobchak
said . `` But in contrast to the majority of Russian politicians , he
knows the western model of economic and political life not as a
outsider but from the inside .

`` He will not blindly transfer some of the recommendations of
the West onto Russia . And I do n't think he 'll repeat the mistakes
we made in the beginning of the '90s , '' when the country plunged
into capitalism without the system of laws and government
regulations needed to sustain it .

Rather , Sobchak said , he expects Putin to follow the example of
two American presidents , Theodore Roosevelt and Franklin D.
Roosevelt , who amassed state power over the government and economy
to shape the capitalistic system that exists today .

Theodore Roosevelt took on entrenched monopolies , helping small
businesses to thrive and competition to flourish . Franklin
Roosevelt reworked the federal government to aid the poor , improve
education and create a less crash-prone financial system .

`` His decisive interference in the economy during the Depression
saved America , '' Sobchak said of Franklin Roosevelt . `` I think
Putin has a wonderful opportunity to become for Russia what the
Roosevelts are for America . And if he does this , he 'll become the
great president in the history of the country . ''

Cowboys know they must pick up the pace

If the Dallas Cowboys reach the NFL playoffs ,
they will do it with fear in their hearts and urgency in their
steps , according to the team 's most outspoken player .

Deion Sanders has never experienced a week like this . When owner
Jerry Jones challenged 20 veterans in a passionate closed-door
meeting on Monday , the laid-back attitude of an entire franchise
changed . Sanders is among many players who think the Cowboys have
one opportunity to correct a season gone sour .

`` That speech should encourage everybody , especially us
million-dollar players , '' the All-Pro cornerback said . `` Something
is seriously wrong with us if that did n't encourage us . ''

The message from the chief executive was stern and direct .
Excuses no longer will be accepted for a 7-8 football team that has
wasted countless chances to improve its standing .

Dallas will earn the final slot in the NFC playoffs if it beats
the New York Giants today at Texas Stadium . A loss would humiliate
everyone wearing blue and silver .

The Cowboys think they have more talent than many of the teams
that have beaten them , and that stings everyone in the
organization . Much of the nation has laughed at the Cowboys _
especially after last week 's loss to New Orleans _ and Jones showed
his rage during a 20-minute session in his office .

`` I had to pray for Jerry afterward , '' Sanders said . `` Let 's
just say he used some words that were special . ''

`` In all the years I 've been here , Jerry 's never had a meeting
like that , '' quarterback Troy Aikman said .

Whether the Cowboys respond with a victory remains to be seen .
They have blown six fourth-quarter leads this season . They lead the
league in penalties . Unless they correct the mistakes that have
dogged them all year , the 1999 season will be over .

`` I took Jerry 's speech personally , '' running back Emmitt Smith
said . `` Now it 's up to us to do something about it . ''

Sanders and Smith understand why Jones took such a harsh stand
Monday . They agree that Dallas has not come close to playing to its
potential . Just last week the Cowboys had five players named to
this season 's Pro Bowl , an indication that their cupboard is hardly
bare . By contrast , 7-8 Green Bay _ another team hoping for the last
playoff spot _ will have no one in Hawaii .

Jones said he felt `` foolish '' after losing to the lowly Saints
because he is paying $ 41.5 million in signing bonuses to players on
a losing team . Jones , a longtime executive in the oil and gas
business , knows when his luck runs dry . For starters , he promised
changes will be made to the roster if the players do not show rapid
improvement .

`` We 've got to fix this thing , '' Jones said after walking off
the Superdome turf .

At that moment , however , it appeared Dallas had no chance of
making the playoffs . The team 's mood brightened considerably Sunday
night when they learned they still had postseason life . If they
beat the Giants , the Cowboys will travel to Minnesota , Tampa Bay or
Washington for a wild-card game next week .

`` Where once there was no life , we have a new life , '' Smith
said . `` What we do with that extra life is up to us . ''

The Cowboys have victories over Green Bay , Miami and Washington
-LRB- twice -RRB- . But they also have lost games to some of the NFL 's worst .
Mental mistakes were blamed for embarrassing losses to
Philadelphia , Arizona and New Orleans .

At least some of their frustration will end if they beat the
Giants .

`` This team has been through quite a lot this decade , '' Smith
said . `` This might be a unique story when all is said and done . ''

The Cowboys are trying to become the first 8-8 team to reach the
playoffs since the 1991 New York Jets . Failure to reach the
playoffs this season would come with a heavy price .

`` If we do n't do what we 're capable of doing , '' Sanders said ,
`` it might be the last time a lot of us will be wearing the helmet
with the star . ''

Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

FOR MILLENNIUM , THE WEB OFFERED A WORLDWIDE VISTA

By the time midnight struck in Maui , even the Internet 's most
dedicated harbingers of millennium doom had to concede that things
had turned out better than they expected .

`` Does anyone still think TEOTWAWKI will happen ?? '' typed one
presumably sleep-deprived Y2K watcher , using the favorite chat-room
shorthand for `` the end of the world as we know it . '' Her virtual
comrades on Timebomb2000.com were remarkably silent .

But as the year 2000 dawned in cyberspace , the sense of
anticlimax was tempered by a new faith not so much in technology
but in humanity 's ability to harness it .

`` Noticed that a sense of global community was one of the
take-away messages of the past 24 hours , '' said another posting ,
signed `` Diana . '' `` Whatever our challenges , and there will be many
-LRB- not necessarily computer-related -RRB- , these images of shared
experience will be fixed in people 's minds . It has the potential to
make us stronger and more resilient . ''

Whether it was because people stayed home to avoid technological
disaster or because they logged on to make sure it had not
happened , millions wove the Internet into their New Year 's Eve . By
midnight on the U.S. East Coast , the EarthCam site , which showed
pictures of celebrations in every time zone , was receiving
thousands of visitors a minute . America Online reported that its
traffic dropped just before midnight and surged again immediately
after .

As friends and families zapped e-mail updates across time zones ,
and the more ambitious broadcast their parties on the World Wide
Web , many said the computer network made for a more intimate sense
of world celebration than what they could watch on television .

Ross Himona , an educator in Wellington , New Zealand , wrote to a
list of dozens of correspondents as his country slipped into the
year 2000 .

`` I 'm still here !! '' Himona said . `` The world did n't come to an
end , the Universe seems intact , and the dreaded apocalyptic y2k bug
did n't devour us all , I think . And the thousands of kids down at
the Wellington waterfront could n't care less . They 're having a
party . Are you all still out there ? Or is New Zealand the only
country to survive ? Am I the only person left in the Universe ?
Speak to me someone !! ''

Himona said he heard back from friends and relatives from Wales
to Seattle as the night circled the globe . `` The Internet is person
to person , '' he wrote in an e-mail , `` like the small family
celebration we had last night . ''

-LRB- BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB-

At midnight in Bosnia , Elizabeth Sweeney , 26 , a U.S. Army
captain stationed at Eagle Base in Tuzla , wrote to her boyfriend at
Fort Knox , Ky. `` Happy yes i am , '' she said , `` and happy new year
too , you make me happy . It is almost 1 am here . Fun little party .
Lots of fake champagne spraying everywhere and lots of noise . I am
sooo sleepy I am going now , before I REALLY fall asleep at the
computer . ''

-LRB- END OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB-

Not all New Year 's connections on the Internet were quite so
poignant . At midnight in Louisville , Colo. , Shane Bower , 28 , and
his eight friends took a break from their computers to drink some
Champagne . Bower 's `` clan '' had been playing Quake , a computer
game , both with one another and over the Internet with players
around the world .

Every once in a while , Bower said , someone in some other time
zone would type `` happy new year '' in the game 's chat box and he
would realize that something momentous was going on outside his
game .

`` Time is kind of meaningless when I turn on the computer , ''
said Bower , a chemical engineer . `` All of a sudden it 's six hours
later , and this time , it was like , all of a sudden it 's the new
millennium . ''

-LRB- STORY CAN END HERE _ OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS -RRB-

Several Web sites served as gathering places for engineers and
novices alike to post observations of computer-related problems in
their corner of the world , or lack thereof .

At 1:23 a.m. in Duesseldorf , Germany , Udo Remmes , a radiologist ,
wrote to a site called Zone2000 : `` No breakdowns or other problems .
River Rhine still flowing . Dog and daughter sleeping . Bit more of
fireworks tonight . Nearly same procedure as last year _ sorry _ as
every year . However , happy New Year . ''

From Manama , Bahrain , David Hyams , a retired businessman , also
gave assurances to the world . `` All is well , '' Hyams , 74 , wrote .
`` Computer is working , the net is up , there is a dial tone , and
lights are on . Best wishes to all . ''

Hyams said he had talked with his daughter , Amy , in San
Francisco earlier in the evening using Yahoo Messenger , a program
that allows voice chat over the Internet .

On the online auction site eBay , some people 's concerns were
more prosaic . Bidding continued through the night , except for two
periods when the company took its servers offline for Y2K-related
maintenance .

`` Looking for small grandfather clocks that stand anywhere from
10 inches to 2 feet in height , '' one bidder with an America Online
e-mail address said in a posting shortly after midnight . `` Can
anyone help ?

In the eBay online cafe , another person was offering `` 100
batteries , 200 gallons bottled water , 300 hundred rounds 30/06 ,
etc. _ cheap !!! ''

Of course , some of those who had actually collected such
supplies were not yet ready to laugh about it on New Year 's Day .

`` We always knew this was n't a one-day event , '' one defiant
doomsayer wrote on a year 2000 preparedness site . `` We have to wait
and see what happens . ''

`` Well , Happy New Year anyway , '' responded someone who signed
himself Yawn2K . `` Better luck next apocalypse , survivalists . ''

BIG MOMENT COMES AND GOES , MINUS DISASTERS

It was three hours before midnight on Friday and
John A. Koskinen did not appear worried a bit . His head was back .
His eyes were closed . And a flight attendant aboard the last Delta
Shuttle flight of 1999 from New York to Washington was urging him ,
to no avail , to return his seat to the upright position .

`` Excuse me , sir , '' the attendant said , pulling at the seat .
`` Excuse me . '' It was three hours before midnight and the federal
government 's year 2000 coordinator , President Clinton 's point man
on the potentially debilitating computer problems , was fast asleep .

That is not to say that Koskinen was not taking the arrival of
the new year seriously , or that he had written off the possibility
of any devastating computer mishaps . `` Some people have said , ` Why
does this guy look so relaxed ? '' ' Koskinen said . `` If I had any
worries , they were at the beginning . The last two months , I 've
slept well every night . ''

Koskinen , a former government budget official and corporate
turnaround expert , had been on the job for more than a year and a
half when the big moment finally arrived . He had held countless
strategy sessions , conference calls , tests , drills , press
briefings , public hearings and closed-door meetings . And even his
brief shut-eye aboard Delta Flight 1769 was work-related . By
catching a quick nap aboard the nearly empty flight , Koskinen was
reassuring the public about the safety of the nation 's airlines .

He had arranged his quick trip to La Guardia Airport and back so
he would be in the air at 7 p.m. Eastern time , which was midnight
in the world of aviation , when the air traffic control system
encountered the year 2000 .

`` Happy New Year , '' he said casually when the big moment
arrived . The 727 he was aboard kept flying . He settled into his
seat . As far as crises go , this one was a snoozer .

The federal government 's round-the-clock $ 50 million command
center had all the hubbub of an insurance office . There were no
officials running around in commando attire . No shouted cries . No
distress .

`` It 's a pretty sedate atmosphere , '' said one staff member , who
left midway through the night to ring in the new year at home .
`` People are making phone calls and making reports , but there 's not
much occurring out there . ''

-LRB- BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB-

So aggressive was the information collection effort , though ,
that even minor traffic glitches in far-flung places were reported
straight to Washington .

Marion , Ohio , reported that its transportation system had
suffered slowdowns , but the culprit was blowing snow and slick
roads , not wayward computers . Quincy , Mass. , noted that traffic was
being rerouted through its downtown because of a New Year 's
celebration there . Rock Springs , Wyo. , noted on its report that
there is a vacancy for the Red Cross directorship there .

The rumors about what might happen far outshined reality .

There had been the talk among the gloomiest about rioting in the
streets , martial law , an end to society as we know it . Part of
Koskinen 's job leading up to the rollover was to calm nerves in
order to prevent runs on banks , hoarding of supplies and other
hysterical behavior .

The Web site set up by the President 's Council on Year 2000
Conversion attempted to shoot down rumors before they spread too
far : Elevators were not at risk of free fall . Prison gates would
not swing open . The president , who was busy speechifying when the
second hand reached the top of the clock , had nothing sinister up
his sleeve .

`` The president has no intention of declaring martial law for
the Year 2000 transition , '' the Web site advised , even offering
some historical context to back up the point . `` No president has
ever declared a condition of martial law that applied to the entire
country . In fact , not since President Lincoln placed several areas
of the country under martial law during the Civil War has any
president directly proclaimed martial law on behalf of the federal
government . ''

-LRB- END OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB-

Government officials warn that year 2000 problems may still crop
up in the days ahead , when businesses open on Monday morning and
the world 's computers first begin operating in a year 2000 world .

`` It is far too early for us to feel totally satisfied and
declare victory , '' Koskinen said at a briefing early Saturday
morning after the new year had begun in the Central time zone . `` I
think we have three or four more days of careful , close monitoring
before we can truly determine how successful we 've been . ''

In addition , computer experts point out that the next potential
catastrophe could come on Feb. 29 , when computers have to deal with
a leap year . On that date , Koskinen will be back in the command
center _ dressed in a suit and tie , not camouflage _ ready for the
worst .

AT THE CLINTON PARTY , MORE BUSINESS AND LESS GLITZ

Despite the beluga and the rack of lamb , Elizabeth
Taylor in a pink boa and Lara Flynn Boyle nuzzling Jack Nicholson
at a table near the back of the East Room , the White House
Millennium supper seemed oddly like a business dinner .

As arriving guests _ some 360 artists , scientists and
fund-raisers , along with major donors , loyal senators and favorite
employees _ filed past reporters in the entryway of the White
House , more than a few took the opportunity to plug some project or
product .

`` I 'm celebrating the 21st century in telecommunications
infrastructure , '' said one sentimentalist . Terry McAuliffe crowed
about raising $ 16 million to pay for the millennial extravaganza ,
and Mary Tyler Moore noted that she was celebrating her ABC movie
`` Mary and Rhoda , '' scheduled for Feb. 7 : `` I 've just seen the
rough cut and I 'm very proud . '' Mary Wilson announced a reunion of
the Supremes .

Others said outright that they felt they had gotten their
money 's worth in return for major donations to pay for the
festivities . And at the dinner itself , executives seated near
Commerce Secretary William Daley were openly lobbying him on behalf
of their businesses .

There was a conspicuous lack of flashy jewelry on display , and
as many women in low-key velvet pants and tunics as in taffeta
gowns . Some , presumably , were dressing to accommodate the silk long
johns recommended by the White House for keeping warm while
watching the show on the Mall later in the evening .

Still , a few guests were sparkling , and the hostess was , too :
Hillary Rodham Clinton 's black silk dress was offset by a collar of
glittering stones . And when a rather baldly appreciative reporter
asked Sophia Loren whether she would be able to keep warm in her
low-cut black dress , she said , `` I have a little wrap , '' and seemed
to gesture toward the diamonds and rubies around her neck .

The president began the dinner with a toast , and on the last New
Year 's of the century , Clinton asked his guests , who were packed
Paris-bistro-close in both the East Room and the State Dining Room ,
to make a wish , and said he would do likewise . He kept his own
hopes to himself , but spoke of a better future that `` I hope every
American will take a moment to imagine on this Millennium Eve . ''

Then , joking that he could hardly be expected to recap the last
1,000 years when `` in the State of the Union I get a whole hour to
talk about a single year and usually I run over , '' he asked the
crowd to join him in a three-part toast to themselves , to Mrs.
Clinton , and to the future itself .

-LRB- STORY CAN END HERE _ OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS -RRB-

Guests included the Nobel prize-winning scientist Murray
Gell-Mann , who gamely tried out some jokes on Sid Caesar , and
Muhammad Ali , who got a bear hug from the president . Walter Kaye ,
the political supporter responsible for first bringing Monica
Lewinsky to the White House , was also on the guest list .

Sen. Edward M. Kennedy , D-Mass. , accompanied by his wife ,
Victoria Reggie Kennedy , and his sister , Jean Kennedy Smith , a
former ambassador to Ireland , came in shouting , `` See my pretty
sister the ambassador ? '' Lynda Johnson Robb said her red brocade
jacket had begun life as a smoking jacket worn by her father ,
President Lyndon B. Johnson .

The contingent of actors included Ossie Davis , Julie Harris and
Robert DeNiro , who raced past reporters as they argued over whether
Nicholson had just said he was glad to be there because `` this is
America here , '' or `` this is America , dear . ''

Ms. Taylor arrived about an hour late after being `` either
caught in traffic or lost , '' a White House spokeswoman said .
Wearing a deep-red velvet gown , she laughed with gusto as she was
led toward the East Room , stepping haltingly while an assistant
followed behind her pushing a wheelchair . Chelsea Clinton , who was
dressed in midnight blue , joined her parents in the receiving line ,
the first time she had taken on such official host duties .

After dinner _ tastes of caviar , foie gras and oyster veloute
and a main course of rack of lamb served with roasted artichoke and
pepper ragout , followed by a green salad and chocolate and
champagne dessert _ guests were bused to the Mall .

The show at the foot of the Lincoln Memorial was nothing if not
eclectic , from Tom Jones singing `` It 's Not Unusual , '' to Bobby
McFerrin , Jessye Norman and Kathleen Battle performing `` He 's Got
the Whole World in His Hands . ''

The Cox News Service spot news budget for Sunday , Jan. 2 , 2000 .

Photo and graphics information and editors ' names can be found
at the end of this budget .

THE WEEKEND DUTY EDITORS ARE :

IN ATLANTA : Greg Laudick 404-526-5456 .

IN WASHINGTON : Andy Alexander 202-887-8334 .

Y2K

Y2K-MAIN _ WASHINGTON _ As the world recovers from millennial
celebrations , we get a clear-eyed assessment of how everyone
survived the threat of a Y2K meltdown and terrorist attacks . Story
will wrap in all major developments . -LRB- Geewax , Cox News Service -RRB-

RUSSIA-Y2K _ MOSCOW _ The first day of the new millennium .
-LRB- Coker , Special to Cox News Service -RRB-

ISRAEL-Y2K _ JERUSALEM _ The first day of business of the new
millennium in the Arab world . -LRB- Kaplow , Cox News Service -RRB-

BRITAIN-Y2K _ LONDON _ The first day of the new millennium .
-LRB- Roughton , Cox News Service -RRB-

MEXICO-Y2K _ MEXICO CITY _ The first day of the new millennium .
-LRB- Contreras , Special to Cox News Service -RRB-

CARIBBEAN-Y2K _ ST. CROIX , U.S. Virgin Islands _ A postcard from
the edge : possible first-person account on the first day of the new
millennium . -LRB- Williams , Cox News Service -RRB-

ITALY-Y2K _ ROME _ The first day of the new millennium , and
coverage of the first papal address for World Peace Day and the
opening of the Holy Door at Santa Maria Maggiore Basilica by Pope
John Paul II . -LRB- Freeman , Special to Cox News Service -RRB-

NATIONAL

OLYMPICS-FUNDING _ Already threatening to cut off American
corporate dollars that bankroll the Olympics , Congressional critics
now are outraged about the increasing amount of federal funds going
to prepare U.S. cities to host the Games . The government plans to
spend a breathtaking $ 1.4 billion on the 2002 Salt Lake City Games ,
more than twice the $ 605 million spent on the much larger Atlanta
Olympics in 1996 , congressional investigators reported last week .
-LRB- Turner Atlanta Journal-Constitution -RRB- . 30 .

COXNET FOCUS PAGE

COXNET FOCUS 0102 CHRISTIANITY FUTURE -- Cox Newspapers '
Christianity at 2000 series concludes with a look at the future of
Christianity , exploring the direction the church seems to be headed
in the next century . -LRB- White , Atlanta Journal-Constitution -RRB- .

EDs : This is the CoxNet Focus page for the week . The layout will
be available Thursday before 2 p.m. EST. .

POLITICS

BRADLEY-STYLE _ Something about putting on shorts every night
for years and dribbling a ball before thousands changes the way a
performer reacts in front of crowds . The tension of stage fright ,
common among those who act , play the concert piano _ or , in most
cases , run for public office _ is missing . The muscles donit
tighten in the same way and the face assumes a loose , locker-room
quality of disregard for the attention being focused on it . As much
as any of the traditional Democratic initiatives he proposes in his
platform , this low-key demeanor , epitomized by the throat lozenge
tumbling constantly in his mouth during his speeches , distinguishes
former Sen. Bill Bradley out on the stump . -LRB- Bradley , Atlanta
Journal-Constitution -RRB- . MOVED

POLITICAL-NOTES _ Mark Sherman 's political notes . -LRB- Sherman ,
Atlanta Journal-Constitution -RRB-

BUSINESS

STOCK-OPTIONS _ More and more employers are awarding employees
stock options . We 'll look at who 's getting them and strategies for
making stock options part of your compensation package . -LRB- Mallory ,
Atlanta Journal-Constitution -RRB-

GA-AETNA-PRUDENTIAL _ ATLANTA _ Aetna appears to be on the verge
of getting final approval to acquire Prudential 's health care
business in Georgia . But the deal has been overshadowed by
problems . The company is on the verge of being fined for late
payments to doctors and patients . At least one hospital is refusing
to treat patients insured by the company because it says Aetna is
lax in paying its bills . There are also customer service problems
that continue to plague Aetna , and the deal raises the question of
whether service will improve in light of its plans to acquire
Prudential . -LRB- Miller , Atlanta Journal-Constitution -RRB-

Y2K-RETURNS _ ATLANTA _ If Y2K comes and goes without a blip ,
shoppers could ring in the New Year at refund counters . Retailers
that have seen a recent spike in sales of emergency supplies are
expecting a good bit of it to come back if New Year 's Eve turns out
to be a non-event . Some retailers , like Sears and Ace Hardware , are
clamping down on customers who bring stuff back . Sears is charging
a 20 percent restocking fee on generators . Some Ace stores wo n't
take back any emergency supplies . Home Depot has a liberal policy
in general and could see the most refunds . Includes reports from
area stores . -LRB- Bond , Atlanta Journal-Constitution -RRB-

DOW-2000 _ If you 're reading this , congratulations , it means you
survived Y2K . More to the point , it means you can probably look
forward to another good year of economic and stock market growth ,
as amazing as that seems . -LRB- Walker , Atlanta Journal-Constitution -RRB-

COXNET BUDGET INFORMATION FOR SUBSCRIBERS OF THE NYT NEWS
SERVICE

Spot news budgets move daily at 2 p.m. and 6 p.m. Eastern .
Additionally , separate features and commentary budgets move at 10
a.m. , and sports and business budgets at 6 p.m. Additional updates
are possible if news developments warrant .

All times are Eastern unless otherwise noted . PLEASE NOTE :
SPORTS STORIES will have an E.T.A. of 9:30 P.M. . If news , business
or features stories will move after 8 p.m. , an ETA will be given .

PHOTOS , LAYOUTS and GRAPHICS

CoxNet layouts are for sale over the web , through the New York
Times News Service 's PageExpress service , at
www.nytsyn.com/syndicate/pageex .

If a budget line or story is marked with photos or graphics ,
those are available from the New York Times News Service at
212-556-4204 . Or call CoxNet for more information at 404-526-5456 .

HOW TO REACH US

Questions should be directed to CoxNet , the Cox News Service , in
Atlanta at 404-526-5456 . We are staffed 8 a.m. to 10 p.m.
Monday-Friday , and 1-10 p.m. on weekends and holidays .

The news manager is Paul Foutch , 404-526-5429 ,
pfoutch -LRB- at -RRB- coxnews.com .

The day news editor is Tom Oder , 404-526-5887 ,
toder -LRB- at -RRB- coxnews.com .

The night news editor is Todd C. Duncan , 404-582-7282 ,
tduncan -LRB- at -RRB- coxnews.com .

Cox Washington Bureau :

News editor Art Dalglish , 202-887-8338 , artd -LRB- at -RRB- coxnews.com

Foreign editor Rick Christie , 202-887-8316 , rickc -LRB- at -RRB- coxnews.com

Bureau chief Andy Alexander , 202-887-8334 , andya -LRB- at -RRB- coxnews.com

Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

A COUNTDOWN TO REMEMBER , OR A BIG YAWN

Before the countdown , the cork popping , the confetti
and the computer worries _ indeed , long before most people had
personal computers _ there was the anticipation . And no one did
more anticipating than Edward Woodyard , who spent 16 percent of the
1900s anticipating the arrival of 2000 .

Woodyard , a screenwriter from Armonk , had spent so much time
ruminating on 2000 because he made his reservations for New Year 's
Eve 1999 in 1983 , when the hotel in Times Square where he finally
did his celebrating on Friday night was a half-finished skeleton of
steel and concrete .

`` I decided if other people were thinking like I was , I 'd better
get my reservations in because when the time comes , it was going to
be a mob scene , '' he said .

It was a mob scene , of course , but Woodyard was above it ,
looking down on Times Square from the 44th floor of the Marriott
Marquis . It seemed the perfect place to consider the question : Did
the arrival of 2000 live up to its billing ?

People probably will be arguing about the answer for the next
thousand years . -LRB- Or at least a thousand hours , which turns out to
be almost 42 days . -RRB-

Woodyard 's answer was affirmative but a bit inarticulate ; after
a lot of partying , even screenwriters find themselves fumbling for
nouns and adjectives , as well as hoarse from shouting `` 10 , 9 , 8 ,
7 '' and so on . But yes , he said , 2000 was worth the wait . `` I was
almost speechless . I do n't have words for it . '' He tried four :
`` Spectacular . Phenomenal . Overpowering . Wow . ''

Then there were the naysayers .

`` Pity the poor millennium , it never had a chance to get off the
ground , '' said Mark Mitten , who registered the word `` billennium ''
as a trademark because , he said , 2000 was the beginning of the
second millennium . Mitten also has a trademark on something called
the `` millennium hype-o-meter '' on his Web site ,
www.millenniumhell.com .

`` Overburdened by Y2K fears , over-the-top parties and marketing
hype , it seemed to have lost any of the potential it had to be a
noble occasion , worthy of waiting a thousand years for , '' said
Mitten . `` With all the overkill , it was hard to know if it had any
significance at all . ''

And so the arrival of 2000 brought a kind of philosophical
seesawing . There were those who thought it was the greatest thing
in the last thousand years , or at least in the last four . Waterford
crystal , which made the ball that slid down the pole on 1 Times
Square at midnight , credited it with a 30 percent increase in sales
last year , double the company 's annual growth rate since 1996 .
Waterford , in fact , sold out of seven millennium-related keepsakes
that cost $ 59 to $ 200 .

The buildup included warnings that there would be no corks to
pop : that there would be a champagne shortage . But late last week
stores were cutting prices they had raised back when they thought
they would be at a different point on the supply-and-demand curve .
Korbel Champagne did run out , but still considered 2000 a
manufacturer 's dream : It had nothing left to sell by the time it
arrived .

But were people hyped out ? Not Jeffrey Katz , an owner of 1 Times
Square . `` It was a thrill , '' he said . `` The confetti was so
voluminous you felt like you could step off the building and walk
right through it . ''

On the other side were those who sounded disappointed that 2000
had crept in so uneventfully .

`` It was overhyped , definitely , '' said Alan Gross , who lives in
Brooklyn and spent New Year 's Eve at home . `` I was hoping my
computer would n't work because I 'd have an excuse to buy a new
one . '' He booted up shortly after midnight and was disappointed by
the lack of drama .

Perhaps the issue of whether the arrival of 2000 was
overpromoted was one of those larger questions : Was the Champagne
glass half full or half empty ? `` We did n't hype this , '' said Peter
Coleman , a vice president of the Times Square Business Improvement
District . `` We were trying to fulfill people 's dreams . ''

And Woodyard certainly seemed close to fulfillment .

`` I know the millennium does n't start till 2001 , Arthur C.
Clarke and all that , but the party is when all those zeroes turn
over , '' he said . `` The only place to be in the world is Times
Square . ''

Lucy Bossert , a spokeswoman for the hotel , said that its
cylindrical core was about half finished when Woodyard called in
1983 . Marriott offered Woodyard a suite with two adjoining bedrooms
free . -LRB- The hotel did not rent other suites for New Year 's Eve ; it
charged $ 2,000 for a four-night package for regular rooms . -RRB-

`` Our generation remembers where we were when Kennedy was
assassinated and our parents remember V-E Day , when that
happened , '' Walker said . `` This was one of those things : where were
you at the beginning of the millennium , when all those zeroes
turned over . I remember what fun I had as a kid , and I think this
was 50 times that . ''

ENTERTAINMENT CAPITAL GETS LACKLUSTER RATING FOR FESTIVITIES

With flashing strobe lights , hovering helicopters ,
and a typically atomized approach , Los Angeles said goodbye to the
1900s Saturday morning in a celebration that fell short of its own
aims , dampened by rain and by Southern California 's seeming
inability to get too excited about anything .

As darkness fell , the designated municipal icon , the HOLLYWOOD
sign , glowed a midnight blue in the hills above the sprawling
metropolis , and as midnight neared , its letters flashed
periodically in streaks of blue and white , like so much psychedelic
marbleized fudge . Moments before the stroke of midnight , Mayor
Richard Riordan and Jay Leno flipped a switch that sent the sign
flashing into shifting shades of purple , yellow , red and orange ,
with white flashing strobes outlining its edges .

But even local television stations seemed to give as much
attention to the sloshing fountains of Las Vegas , apparently
underwhelmed by their own city 's stab at civic iconography . And
revelers gathered on the rooftops of the 70-year-old residential
subdivision that the Hollywood sign was built to advertise , kept
waiting for a promised spectacle that never quite materialized .

In sum , the celebration seemed proof positive that Los Angeles
lacks the sort of public gathering place that defines a New York or
London , and the sign-lighting itself remained a largely private
affair , since homeowners in the neighborhoods around it had
protested the plan and the police set up a network of multiple
checkpoints to keep all but residents and their invited guests from
driving into the network of canyons with the best views . Horns and
cheers rang out from a few dozen houses , but there was nothing like
the huge gathering in Times Square .

Though city officials fielded what they called the largest
police operation in Los Angeles history , there were no reports of
serious trouble , and Southern California Edison , which supplies
power to 11 million people in 10 counties , said that there was a
greater risk of electricity problems caused by drunken drivers
hitting utility poles than by any problems in computer programs
governing the power grids .

The festivities got under way Friday afternoon with a musical
celebration dubbed Opus 21 , in which churches , choirs and other
groups began a simultaneous sounding of bells , cymbals , gongs and
shofars to start the celebration . But by mid-afternoon , pouring
rain and spotty street flooding had scattered a crowd of several
hundred people from Grand Avenue downtown , where the theme was
`` The Global Village , '' with a sort of street fair featuring
face-painters , a Ferris wheel and considerably fewer than the 2,000
marching band members that had been promised .

`` So far , so good , '' said Linda Miller , who came from nearby
Torrance , Calif. , where her husband , Dave , to watch their daughter
march in the band .

`` I kind of wish it did n't have to rain . '' Surveying the crowd ,
she added : `` It 's a little thin . I think they were a little light
on the advertising . ''

A few blocks away , on Olvera Street , the site of the city 's
original Spanish settlement , crowds were thicker .

But by night 's end , police officers in the city 's official
command center were downing deli sandwiches and complaining of an
unexpected challenge : boredom .

STILL FEW Y2K GLITCHES RERORTED

As the world glided smoothly into the new century ,
the United States reported Saturday only a smattering of minor Y2K
glitches , but officials cautioned that problems could still crop
up , especially starting Monday .

John Koskinen , chief of the White House 's Y2K command center ,
said Monday will be a crucial milestone because it will be the
first day of normal business operations following the long holiday
weekend .

Otherwise , he offered generally upbeat news about the nation 's
progress . `` We have not been able to find anything of great
significance to report , '' he said .

All of the nation 's major sectors from airlines to electric
power grids to telecommunications continued working without
incident on the first day of the new century , he said .

The Pentagon reported Saturday that a satellite intelligence
defense system had failed shortly after 7 p.m. EST Friday when the
clock in that system turned past midnight Greenwich Mean Time .

John Hamre , Deputy Defense Secretary , said that a backup system
is currently in place and that the problem is with a computer on
the ground and not in the satellite itself .

Other reported Y2K glitches , however , were quickly fixed .
Koskinen said an Amtrak computer system used to track trains
automatically went down temporarily early Saturday but that train
officials switched to a manual system and then fixed the computer .

Computers at five nuclear plants across the country also
experienced temporary problems , but Koskinen said they were
immediately fixed and those plants ' operations were not affected .

The U.S. Naval Observatory , which has a master clock in
Washington that serves as the nation 's official source of time ,
reported the date as Jan. 1 , 19100 during the earliest hours of the
new year on its Internet site . The glitch has since been corrected
and was only on that Web site . It was not a problem in the master
clock , Koskinen said .

He said federal government agencies and private industry would
continue testing their systems and report any glitches , whether
Y2K-related or not . He said checks of federal government buildings
showed temporary problems with alarm systems at U.S. facilities in
Boston , Kansas City and Omaha .

A Federal Aviation Administration system used to notify pilots
about such things as weather via e-mail shut down Saturday , but
Koskinen said it was unclear whether the problem was Y2K-related . A
backup pilot notification system was put in place , and air traffic
safety was not affected , he added .

As a precaution , the Social Security Administration ,
headquartered in Baltimore , switched to backup generators before
the millenium rollover . The agency switched its systems back to
Baltimore 's main power grid at 6 a.m. EST Saturday without
incident . Koskinen said all of Social Security 's computers in
Baltimore and at its field offices across the country are working
normally .

Some other federal agencies , also as a precaution , temporarily
shut down their Internet Web sites .

For the most part , Koskinen and other top government officials
gave upbeat reports for the second day in a row as the new year
swept across the globe .

On Friday , countries such as China , Russia and Ukraine , which
preceded the United States into the new year , rolled into Jan. 1
without problems in their nuclear power plants and other key
systems that American officials had feared might shut down as a
result of a Y2K computer glitch . More significantly , those systems
continued operating in those countries on their second day of the
New Year .

The biggest reported Y2K problem overseas occurred when Japan 's
Shika Nuclear Power Station about 170 miles northwest of Tokyo lost
its radiation alarm system shortly after midnight there . Energy
Secretary Bill Richardson described it as a backup system and said
it did not affect plant safety .

The United States passed its first Y2K tests at 7 p.m. EST
Friday , when computers that control airline traffic , about a third
of the nation 's power grid and military operations appeared to roll
over into the new year without incident . The

computers are based on Greenwich Mean Time , which is five hours
ahead of the Eastern Standard Time zone .

`` The nation 's airspace system is up and running safely , ''
Federal Aviation Administration chief Jane Garvey said Friday
night . She flew on a jet from Washington , D.C. , to Dallas when air
traffic computers passed midnight GMT .

Koskinen , who had predicted an easy transition into the new
year , said the fact that it happened should not lead to anyone to
`` underestimate the nature of the problem that was originally
there .

`` Had the effort not been made , had the money not been spent , we
would be in a very different situation than we find ourselves in
right now , '' he said .

The Commerce Department estimates that some $ 100 billion was
spent in the United States over the past five years to fix the Y2K
problem _ which would occur if computers interpreted the digits 00
as 1900 rather than 2000 . Worldwide is it estimated that
governments and private industry spent close to $ 400 billion fixing

their computers .

STILL FEW Y2K GLITCHES REPORTED

As the world glided smoothly into the new century ,
the United States reported Saturday only a smattering of minor Y2K
glitches , but officials cautioned that problems could still crop
up , especially starting Monday .

John Koskinen , chief of the White House 's Y2K command center ,
said Monday will be a crucial milestone because it will be the
first day of normal business operations following the long holiday
weekend .

Otherwise , he offered generally upbeat news about the nation 's
progress . `` We have not been able to find anything of great
significance to report , '' he said .

All of the nation 's major sectors from airlines to electric
power grids to telecommunications continued working without
incident on the first day of the new century , he said .

The Pentagon reported Saturday that a satellite intelligence
defense system had failed shortly after 7 p.m. EST Friday when the
clock in that system turned past midnight Greenwich Mean Time .

John Hamre , Deputy Defense Secretary , said that a backup system
is currently in place and that the problem is with a computer on
the ground and not in the satellite itself .

Other reported Y2K glitches , however , were quickly fixed .
Koskinen said an Amtrak computer system used to track trains
automatically went down temporarily early Saturday but that train
officials switched to a manual system and then fixed the computer .

Computers at five nuclear plants across the country also
experienced temporary problems , but Koskinen said they were
immediately fixed and those plants ' operations were not affected .

The U.S. Naval Observatory , which has a master clock in
Washington that serves as the nation 's official source of time ,
reported the date as Jan. 1 , 19100 during the earliest hours of the
new year on its Internet site . The glitch has since been corrected
and was only on that Web site . It was not a problem in the master
clock , Koskinen said .

He said federal government agencies and private industry would
continue testing their systems and report any glitches , whether
Y2K-related or not . He said checks of federal government buildings
showed temporary problems with alarm systems at U.S. facilities in
Boston , Kansas City and Omaha .

A Federal Aviation Administration system used to notify pilots
about such things as weather via e-mail shut down Saturday , but
